Lesson 265 From Living with Siva

Three Kinds

Of Karma

Karma is threefold: sañchita, prārabdha and kriyamāna. Sañchita karma means “accumulated actions.” It is the sum of all karmas of this life and our past lives. Prārabdha karma means “actions begun; set in motion.” It is that portion of sañchita karma that is bearing fruit and shaping the events and conditions of the current life, including the nature of our bodies, personal tendencies and associations. Kriyamāna karma means “actions being made.” It is the karma we create and add to sañchita in this life by our thoughts, words and actions, or in the inner worlds between lives. While some kriyamāna karmas bear fruit in the current life, others are stored for future births. Each of these three types can be divided into two categories: ārabdha (“begun, undertaken;” karma that is “sprouting”), and anārabdha (“not commenced; dormant”), or “seed karma.”

In a famed analogy, karma is compared to rice in its various stages. Sañchita karma, the residue of one’s total accumulated actions, is likened to rice that has been harvested and stored in a granary. From the stored rice, a small portion has been removed, husked and readied for cooking and eating. This is prārabdha karma, past actions that are shaping the events of the present. Meanwhile, new rice, mainly from the most recent harvest of prārabdha karma, is being planted that will yield a future crop and be added to the store of rice. This is kriyamāna karma, the consequences of current actions.

Prārabdha karma determines the time of birth, which dictates one’s astrology, which in turn delineates the individual life pattern by influencing the release of these karmas. Three factors are fundamental: the nature of one’s birth, the length of life and the nature of experiential patterns. Dormant sañchita karma, while not directly being acted upon, is a weighty and compelling force of potential energy, be it benign or gross, good or bad, slothful or inspirational. It is this dormant karma that explains why two people born at the same moment, and who thus have the same astrology, differ in their talents and tendencies. It is this held-back force of sañchita karma that the yogī seeks to burn out with his kuṇḍalinī flame, to disempower it within the karmic reservoir of ānandamaya kośa, the soul body.

Astrologers who understand karma well emphasize that one can influence his or her dormant sañchita karma. Further, one does have power over karmas being made, kriyamāna. But karmas set in motion, prārabdha, are binding. They form the gridwork of life and must be lived through. Facing them positively is the key to their resolution. Fighting them through resentment and the release of other negative emotions only creates more unseemly sañchita karma for the future. The law is: we must accept and bear our karma cheerfully. 