Lesson 298 From Living with Siva

Keeping Peace With Yourself

The older children and young adults in the family must be taught that it is their responsibility, too, to see that the prāṇas are all flowing nicely in the home, so the little children and babies are protected. Young adults, having just come out of the instinctive mind themselves, are breaking the barriers into the intellect, experiencing these new prāṇas and beginning to think for themselves. This is the time when elders can guide them into the zero-tolerance-for-disharmonious-conditions philosophical outlook. Youths who have accepted the concept are most respectful of loving relationships. They tried it out and found for themselves that “Yes, we do have control over the instinctive mind” and “No, we won’t allow it to run wild within our home, among our friends or in our associations with the community.” They will be the ones to keep the flow of prāṇas harmonious.

Then the next step unfolds from within most naturally: zero tolerance for disharmonious conditions within our own self. This brings us back to my guru’s wisdom: claim the strength to stop being miserable, to stop tolerating turmoil inside yourself. How is this accomplished? We have to boldly affirm, “I will not allow the instinctive mind that I experienced as a child to control me in any way. I will not allow anger to come up. I will not allow jealousy to dominate my thinking and make me feel inferior or superior to someone else. I will not allow fear to permeate my aura.”

Then, each day before bedtime, settle any unresolved matters within yourself by performing the vāsanā daha tantra, “subconscious purification by fire.” Vāsanās are sub-subconscious traits, complexes or subliminal tendencies which, as driving forces, color and motivate one’s attitudes and actions. Vāsanās are conglomerates of subconscious impressions, saṁskāras, created through repeated or powerful experience. Daha means to burn, consume by fire, and a tantra is a method or technique, and the method here is to write out clearly all problems as well as emotional happenings, unhappy or happy, that are vibrating in the subconscious, instinctive-intellectual mind. When the eyes, through the intellectual mind or conscious mind, see the problem written down, the emotion attached to the memory begins to diminish. Then crumple up the paper and burn it in an ordinary fire, such as in a fireplace, urn or garbage can, to totally release some of life’s burdens from the subconscious and dispel the suppressed emotions as the fire consumes the paper.

This simple tantra removes the vāsanās from the memory and emotional recesses along with the emotion, resentments, hurt feelings and misunderstandings. Soon the superconscious prāṇas will begin to flow, and our natural, peaceful self emerges, and we may be left wondering, “Why was I ever bothered about that trivial incident?”

What happens if we don’t resolve inharmonious or congested matters within ourself before sleep? The condition will go to seed, and those vṛittis, waves of the mind, which were disturbed by the experiential creation of the situation, will form a vāsanā to germinate at a later time in life, perhaps many years in the future, or even in another lifetime. This daily mental maintenance, of course, requires discipline. It may be easier to simply drop off to sleep feeling angry, jealous, guilty, dejected or sorry for oneself.

Yes, zero tolerance for disharmonious conditions can be applied within oneself as well as among a family or any group of people. This practice can be established in one of two ways. Start with yourself and then carry it out to others. Or start with your relationships with others, smoothing out the prāṇas when they go a little crazy, and then finally apply it to yourself when you are convinced that this is the way life should be lived. Zero tolerance for disharmonious conditions is clearly the only way once one fully accepts the basic principles of the Sanātana Dharma: all-pervasive energy, cause and effect, and coming back in a physical birth until all scores are settled.

Remember the inspiring words of the Atharva Veda, “Let us have concord with our own people and concord with people who are strangers to us. Aśvins, create between us and the strangers a unity of hearts. May we unite in our midst, unite in our purposes and not fight against the divine spirit within us” (7.52.1-2. HV, P 205).