Lesson 364 From Living with Siva

Sannyāsins Are Needed

There are hundreds of thousands of sannyāsins, Hindu monks, throughout North India. But where are the sannyāsins that have been produced by the Hindu community of northern Sri Lanka? Where are they? The community produces attorneys. The community produces businessmen. The community produces freedom fighters. Why not produce a swāmī also? Is that too much to ask? It’s not too much to ask. It is part of Hindu culture to dedicate a son to religious orders. This same community, however, has given many, many of their young men to the Catholic Church to become its priests. This is difficult to understand. It really is.

A young man before the age of twenty-five should be allowed to make a personal decision whether he wants to follow the path of the sannyāsin or the path of the householder. He should never be forced into employment to earn a big dowry in order to marry off his sisters. It is a sin if he is forced to work in the world if his calling is to find God and serve his people through Hinduism. It is a sin, when the calling of his soul is to realize God, to force him into a marriage. The best thing for the family, for the community and for all of humanity would be to let those rare souls seek out God, take their holy vows of sannyāsa and bring light and love back into a hurting world through their awakened being.

The Hindu community in Sri Lanka should produce spiritual leaders from among its young men. It has quite enough of all the other kinds of professions. It should again produce great swāmīs, as well as many gṛihastha missionaries and ministers. We asked this young man sitting here before me an hour ago, “How many people of your age go to the religious meetings and events?” He said, “Very few of us do.” The parents should bring their young men with them by the hundreds to listen to visiting swāmīs and participate in other functions. Hindus around the world have to stand up for Hinduism, support it by their efforts, their interest, their resources of time and money and talent.

Last week while in Chennai, Swami Chinmayananda, a friend of mine for over twenty years, and I were talking together. A young man came in during our conversation and told Swami that he was preparing to go to school and then asked Swami for his blessings. Swami inquired of him what he would do after finishing with schooling. He said, “Then I will be married.” Swami inquired, “Then what?” “Then I’ll raise the children.” Swami asked again, “Then what?” “I will go on with my profession.” Swami persisted, “Then what?” He went on like that until finally the young man said, “Well, then I will die.” Swami then said to him. “You should do some useful service and help me in my mission before you marry. There are enough children being born in India today—that can wait a little. Come to me after your schooling and we will do some useful work for God and our people together.”

The point is that all things in life must be centered around religion. Only the spiritual matters of life live on. Everything else in life is destined to perish. This body will perish. This personality will perish. But our religion will live on and grow inside of us as we evolve from life to life. It is the duty of each Hindu, young or old, to help the religion progress from generation to generation. We help Hinduism live on by serving and guiding others. For true and lasting happiness, religion must be the basis of everything in life, around which all other interests and desires revolve. So many people are against religion these days. It is up to religious people to make it popular again.

India and Sri Lanka are in between being agricultural countries and technological countries. We have to bring Hinduism into the technological age. It has to be reiterated, reedited and reexplained. We must teach how the worship of Lord Gaṇeśa can help people run their computer better, help them become a better typist, help them handle the stress and strain that come from dealing with traffic and coping with people of all kinds. Hinduism has to be retranslated, updated into this industrial and technological era. Who can do that? Only the intelligent older people like yourselves. Intelligent older people can take this on and help me in this reformation, and then we will together pass it to the next generation. Soon the Hindus of all sects will become strong and proud of their religion.

Let us now affirm: “Lord Śiva loves and cares for all of His devotees. He always has and He always will.” “Lord Śiva loves and care for all of His devotees. He always has and He always will.” Let’s work together, and let’s begin now.