ID	Title	Body1	Chant Aum	Take a deep breath and chant Aum nine times. The first syllable is A, pronounced as the English word “awe,” but prolonged: “aaa.” The second syllable is U, as in “roof,” pronounced “oo,” but prolonged: “ooo.” The third syllable is M, pronounced “mm” with the front teeth gently touching and the sound prolonged: “mmmm.” Each repetition is sounded for about seven seconds, with two seconds on A, two seconds on U and three seconds on M, with a silence of about two seconds before the next repetition. The three syllables are run together: AAUUMM (silence), AAUUMM (silence), AAUUMM (silence). On the first syllable, A, we feel the solar plexus and chest vibrating. On the second syllable, U, the throat vibrates. The third syllable, M, vibrates the top of the head.  2	Practice Manifiests Perfection	"Practice makes perfect" applied to efforts in our spiritual life takes on a different meaning. Our inner essence, our soul nature, is already perfect. Our practice, or self effort, is to bring that inner perfection into our outer intellectual, emotional and instinctive nature. Thus we could modify the adage to be "practice manifests perfection." Satguru Bodhinatha Veylanswami3	Affirmation: Master of My Mind, Body and Emotions	Repeat 3 times: "I am the complete master of my mind, body and emotions." As you say these words, visualize that you are the master of your mind, master of your body and master of your emotions.4	Wonder and Ponder: Totally Detatched	As you wander through nature, be detached from body, mind and emotions. When you find yourself saying, I am hungry or I am thirsty, rephrase and say my body is hungry or thirsty. When you find yourself thinking I understand or don't understand, rephrase...my intellect understands or doesn’t understand. When you claim an emotional identity, I am certainly happy this morning, or I am a bit depressed this morning... again rephrase my emotions are happy or a bit depressed.5	Daily Challange: Mistreatment by Others	When life provides us the experience in which we are mistreated by others, rather than retaliate or hold resentment, forgive and respond with kindness.  7	Daily Challange: Difficult Projects	When faced with tasks that stretch our abilities, we can do the minimal just to get by or be inspired to do our best by looking at them as opportunities to improve our concentration, willpower and steadfastness, all of which will enhance our meditation abilities and inner striving.11	Lift Burdens Through Your Own Light	"Go out into the world this week and let your light shine through your kind thoughts, but let each thought manifest itself in a physical deed of doing something for someone else. Lift their burdens just a little bit and, unknowingly perhaps, you may lift something that is burdening your mind. We call this karma yoga." Satguru Sivaya Subramuniyaswami12	Mistreatment by Others	Mistreatment by Others is a common challenge we face in life that provides us with good opportunities for spiritual progress, if we respond in a wise manner with self-control. Life provides us a steady stream of experiences in which we are mistreated by others. Rather than retaliate or hold resentment, we can forgive and respond with kindness.13	Our Own Mistakes	Reacting to our own mistakes is a common challenge we face in life that provides us with good opportunities for spiritual progress, only if we respond in a wise manner with self-control. When we make a major error, we have a choice to wallow in self-doubt and self-deprecation or to figure out how to not repeat the mistake.14	Difficult Projects	When faced with tasks that stretch our abilities, we can do the minimal just to get by or be inspired to do our best by looking at them as opportunities to improve our concentration, willpower and steadfastness, all of which will enhance our meditation abilities and inner striving.15	Disturbed Emotions	When we get upset by life's experiences, we have a choice to suffer the emotional upheaval or to strive to pull ourselves out of it as quickly as possible. This is a common challenge we face in life that provides us with good opportunities for spiritual progress, only if we respond in a wise manner with self-control.18	Let Your Light Shine	"Go out into the world today and let your light shine through your kind thoughts, but let each thought manifest itself in a physical deed of doing something for someone else. Lift their burdens just a little bit and, unknowingly perhaps, you may lift something that is burdening your mind. Through service and kindness, you can unwind the subconscious mind and gain a clear understanding of all laws of life. Your soul will shine forth. You will be that peace. You will radiate that inner happiness and be truly secure, simply by practicing being kind in thought, word and deed." Gurudeva, Living with Siva19	Seeing God in Those We Greet	When greeting someone today, strive to look deeply enough into them to see God, to see them as a divine being evolving through experience into oneness with God. Our attitude is then naturally helpful and benevolent. Having a great day also includes making spiritual progress. 20	Volunteering	Take one opportunity today and offer to help beyond what is required of us. An attitude of humble service diminishes the ego and strengthens our spiritual identity. Hold the attitude of being willing to help when called upon, to not resist or refuse. Having a great day also includes making spiritual progress. 21	Expressing Appreciation	Find one opportunity today to uplift and encourage others by sincerely expressing how grateful we are for their help, friendship and importance in our life. Having a great day also includes making spiritual progress. 22	Helping Newcomers	In our modern world, people move around a great deal. Thus there is a steady flow of newcomers at work, at school, in our neighborhood and at our temple. Step forward today to welcome and help orient one person into their new environment. This is an excellent way to be of service. Having a great day also includes making spiritual progress. 23	Offering Hospitality	Find a creative way today to be hospitable in the home, at school and even at work. Offer someone some tea, coffee, water, something to eat, or even just a comfortable place to sit. Having a great day also includes making spiritual progress. 24	Making Encouraging and Complimentary Remarks	Make a point to say something encouraging and complimentary to everyone you meet. Their day will be brighter because of it, and so will yours. Having a great day also includes making spiritual progress. 25	Empathy	Be a spiritual leader today by asking someone you know about an aspect of their life, such as their children or recent travel, and show an interest in their well being. This is an important source of upliftment and encouragement for people from all walks of life.26	Encouraging Words	Be a spiritual leader today and uplift the spirit of others by speaking encouraging words. You, too, can be a spiritual leader. Simply make it a point to say something encouraging, complimentary and high-minded to everyone you meet. Their day will be brighter because of it, and so will yours. Your words may be just what they needed to escape a moody morning and discover a new energy for the day. 27	Encouragement in Meetings	At a meeting today, be encouraging. Listen attentively to each individual's ideas, and when they are good ideas be sure to compliment them. If someone is a bit shy in presenting an idea, make a few encouraging remarks to help him or her feel more confident. Control yourself by not dominating every meeting with your ideas and presence. This is how you can be a spiritual leader.28	Expressing Gratitude	Be a spiritual leader today by expressing gratitude for people's help, friendship and presence in your life. Those who are full of gratitude lack nothing. They are filled with divine energy, complete, with nothing to require for their further happiness, nothing to regret. Their spirit is whole, their life is rich beyond measure. So, naturally, they are the spiritual leaders to others who feel less than perfect in their lives. Gratitude may seem an ordinary thing, but it is the touchstone of spiritual maturity.29	Gratitude with a Smile	Shower gratitude on others today. It teaches them of their own fullness. One of the first ways to do so is to greet everyone with a good morning, afternoon or evening, and a smile. Keeping your mood elevated lifts everyone around you. Being kindly reminds them to show others kindness. Be the opposite of a complainer.30	Sadhana of Gratitude	Take out a piece paper and pen, and list the good that has come into your life during the past year. As memory is stimulated, the list will grow. Feelings of loving appreciation will begin to flow toward those who helped you during these good times. Feelings of acceptance and forgiveness will also well up for the bad times. This sadhana echoes the wisdom found in the Turukural's chapter on gratitude: "It is improper to ever forget a kindness, but good to forget at once an injury received."31	Sadhana of Appreciation Towards Others	Approach someone you are grateful for and tell them, while looking deep into their eyes, how much you esteem and value them. Be specific. That is the key. Don't just say something general, like, "You are wonderful." Rather, point out specific qualities so that the person knows you really, deeply feel what you are saying, that it is not just a surface compliment. Convince him or her that you are sincere by your kind words and smiling face.32	Sadhana of Appreciation Towards Oneself	Stand before a mirror, looking into your eyes, and say aloud, "I am grateful to you and appreciate your being in my life." You can then describe some of the many good actions you have done during the past five years. Once you feel comfortable appreciating yourself, you are ready to begin appreciating others. This exercise helps overcome any shyness you may feel.33	Wandering Sadhana on the Intellect	Take a 15 minute walk. For the first few minutes of wandering watch your intellect think. Notice particularly how active it is. For the next few minutes regulate your breath by breathing nine counts in, hold one, nine counts out, hold one. Then again focus on your intellect and see how much the thought activity has slowed down.34	Sadhana for Understanding Your Spiritual Unfoldment	Choose the one Hindu saint, swami or yogi, living or passed on, who you feel achieved the greatest spiritual attainment. Now imagine and accept the idea that his or her attainment is your own potential. That is the surprising truth. The potential to achieve what anyone else has achieved spiritually lies within you to be manifested at some point in your future. Perhaps that thought will motivate you to organize the sometimes puzzling pieces of your life and to put just a bit more effort into those spiritual practices! Visualize the lotus flower in full, magnificent bloom--that is the symbol of your full, resplendent spiritual potential.35	Visualize Your Soul Body	Take a moment and visualize your soul as Gurudeva described his own experience in Merging with Siva: "One day you will see the being of you, your divine soul body. You will see it inside the physical body. It looks like clean, clear plastic. Around it is a blue light, and the outline of it is whitish yellow. Inside of it is blue-yellowish light, and there are trillions of little nerve currents, or quantums, and light scintillating all through that. This body stands on a lotus flower. Inwardly looking down through your feet, you see you are standing on a big, beautiful lotus flower. This body has a head, it has eyes, and it has infinite intelligence. It is tuned into and feeds from the source of all energy."36	Cultivate Being the Witness	Take a walk, ideally in nature. Notice every detail that you can about what you see. Perhaps you have had the experience of walking with a young child and they point out to you qualities about what you are seeing that you hadn't noticed. Young children have great powers of observation because their intellect is not overactive nor have they accumulated lots of unresolved past experiences. So we can try and be like them by noticing as many details as possible. Becoming a good witness of our natural surroundings is excellent preparation for becoming a good witness of our thoughts. The only difference between the jnani and the novice is that the jnani stays in there longer as the watcher, whereas the novice experiences this only momentarily from time to time. Cultivating being the witness is key to meditation and experiencing your perfect state of inner being.37	Take a Walk as a Young Child	Take a walk with a young child, or imagine being one. A good way to measure the level of mental distraction you are experiencing is to walk outdoors with young children. They will always notice many more details of the surroundings than you because their minds are not yet drawn to past and future concerns. 38	Observation While Wandering	Begin by walking and observing the details of every aspect of nature that you see--the colors and shapes of the plants, trees, water and other objects. Then sit for a while and be the witness of your thoughts. Follow Markanduswami's exercise and try to be aware of everything you think about. Don't miss one topic of thought, identify them all. We are not the mind, we are the witness who observes the mind.39	Mountain Top Consciousness	Go to the top of a mountain, or at least a tall building. Look down on the cities below and the homes. From this perspective, we can more easily look at the patterns in your own life--witness more clearly what you are actually doing on a day-to-day basis. Often we can clearly see for the first time some negative patterns that we would be better off without. This, of course, is the first step toward changing those patterns.40	Worry Without Making a Decision	If you find yourself constantly thinking about a major decision without making any conclusion then jump to another topic, then jump back, make an appointment with yourself say at 10am tomorrow. At that time you will sit down and think about it until you reach a conclusion. Then if you find yourself thinking about it before then, put the thought off by saying I have an appointment and there is no need to think about it before then.41	Realize You Are The Experiencer	When you experience an emotion today, be it happiness, sadness, jealousy or fear, realize that saying "I am happy" is incorrect. Be the witness that controls and experiences the mind. Say "I am experiencing happiness," and realize you are the experiencer.42	Affirmation All My Needs Will Always Be Met	Repeat the affirmation, "All my needs will always be met," and feel how it is to feel after all of your needs have been met. Until you find this feeling, you should not expect the affirmation to work. This is the esoteric secret of making an affirmation work. Every time that you have a need and that need is met, a certain feeling is then produced in you. That same feeling you have to feel the very instant you speak the affirmation. You then open a channel that instant to your own intuition through which all good comes. In this state of mind one has inspiration and will. Simultaneously think, visualize and feel deeply with an inner, all-encompassing knowing that each need will be met. 43	Affirmation: I am the the Master...	Here is another affirmation: "I am the master of my body." Sit and feel that you are the master of your body. Say to yourself over and over again, "I am the master of my body." Now, quietly, without thinking, feel and visualize that you are the master of your body. Really know that you are director of your physical vehicle. In repeating this next affirmation, "I am the master of my body, my mind and my emotions," feel and visualize exactly what these words mean. Then repeat time and time again, "I am the master of my body, my mind and my emotions," all the while visualizing and feeling exactly what you eventually want to be like, because what you cause now you cause in your future.45	Breathe to Reduce Thoughts	Take two minutes today and concentrate on reducing the miscellaneous thoughts about current concerns, such as plans for the day or the news we saw on TV last night. These can be restrained by practicing pranayama, breath control. A simple, effective technique is to breathe in for nine counts, hold for one count, breathe out for nine counts and hold for one count. After breathing in this way for a few minutes, your thinking process will naturally calm down.46	Wander and Ponder the Experiencer	Take a short walk and think back over the last few weeks and the states of consciousness you most commonly experienced. Imagine being in that state of mind in the present. Then see yourself as the experiencer, awareness, of that state of consciousness. Focus on identifying with the unchanging awareness that is constant through all the varied states of consciousness you experienced. That is the real you, the soul.48	Worship Ganesha When Returning Home	Upon returning to the home, worshiping Ganapati to drop off any worldliness taken on during our time away from home.49	Ask For Ganesha's Help With Intellectual Tasks	Before facing difficult issues, such as taking school exams, a tough project at work, or facing other challenging intellectual tasks, visualize the image of Lord Ganesha sending His blessings to you.50	Ganesha Soothes Emotions	If you get more emotional today than you want and find yourself experiencing anger, fear, or jealousy, sing a Ganesha bhajan, repeat Ganesha mantras such as "Aum" a few times and let His soothing presence calm those emotions.51	Ganesha's Good Timing	Mentally pray to Ganesha to help with good timing today. Especially watch for times when we find ourselves consistently missing the timing of events. If that happens, stop and take time to worship Ganesha and ask his help getting into flow of good timing.52	Traveling in the Mind	Just as you travel around the world, when you're in meditation you travel in the mind. We have the big city called thought. We have another big city called emotion. There's yet another big city called fear, and another one nearby called worry. But we are not those cities. We're just the traveler. When we're in San Francisco, we are not San Francisco. When we're aware of worry, we are not worry. We are just the inner traveler who has become aware of the different areas of the mind. Gurudeva in Merging With Siva53	Controlling Our State Of Consciousness	Watch for the tendency of awareness to move around because of what others are saying and doing to us. Don't let your state of consciousness be at the mercy of others. Don't let what people say and do make us be happy or unhappy, joyous or depressed. Be careful that casual interactions with others, doesn't move our own awareness into their states of consciousness.54	Wonder and Ponder Awareness Traveling	As you wander today, think back to your last visit to a large city. Recall the various parts of the city you traveled through. Impress yourself with the idea that you are the traveler moving through the various sections of the city, just as you travel through states of consciousness, both positive and negative. Impress yourself with the idea that you are the inner traveler, awareness, moving through these different areas of consciousness.55	See Your Soul In A Mirror	Look deeply into a mirror. See your soul by looking into your eyes and seeing the sparkle, that pure life energy within. "Deep inside we are perfect this very moment, and we have only to discover and live up to this perfection to be whole." Gurudeva56	Wonder and Ponder Life Energy	As you wander in nature today, think about this Gurudeva quote: "We are the undying consciousness and energy flowing through all things. Deep inside we are perfect this very moment, and we have only to discover and live up to this perfection to be whole. Our energy and God's energy are the same, ever coming out of the void. We are all beautiful children of God. Each day we should try to see the life energy in trees, birds, animals and people. When we do, we are seeing God Siva in action."57	Visualize Yourself on a Mountaintop	Visualize yourself sitting on top of a mountain. There is no place to go except inside yourself. If you were to go down the northern side of the mountain, you would be going into the future and its ramifications, which are only conceptual. If you were to go down the southern side, you would be going into the past and its similar recorded ramifications. So, you stay where you are, at the pinnacle of consciousness, well balanced between past and future. Everything is in its rightful place in the master plan of evolution, so you sit, just watching, sensing the clarity of your own perfect being, learning to live in spiritual consciousness every day. That is your heritage on this Earth. 58	Open A Book To a Page With Your Intuition	If you desire to find the answer to any question intently enough, you can find the answer within yourself, or you can find it in our holy scriptures or books of wisdom. Pick up one of these books, open it, and you will intuitively turn to the page which holds an answer to your question. You have had the experience at one time or another of recognizing your answer as confirmation that all knowing is within you.--Gurudeva in Merging With Siva59	Concentration Playback	Your goal during the day is to be enthusiastic and put your whole positive self into each task you're engaged in, knowing yourself to be a divine being performing dharma. At the end of each day, briefly practice concentration playback and review the tasks you performed during the day. Only review the current day; do not allow unrelated thoughts from other days to enter. If any tasks were not done with full energy and to the best of your ability, reflect on how you could do them better.60	Visualize a River	Close your eyes and visualize a river and realize it as the life force within you flowing from God Siva. Hold this realization permanently within you, simultaneously seeing the source of the cosmic river of energy, which is in God Siva, and the end where it merges into the sea of external life as we know it today. While holding this visualization, you now can clearly see where you have been clinging to the banks of the river of life. You will also clearly see just how long you have been clinging to various negative attachments by holding on to jealousies, fears, worries, doubts of the future or regrets about the past.61	Turn Energies Within	Take a moment out of your normal activities today, when perhaps you sense that your energies are blocked, to turn your awareness within. Stop right there. Breathe quietly and feel the powerful energies of God Siva flowing through your nervous system. Feel it flowing out from your spine, invigorating every cell of your body, enlivening every atom of your being.62	Clean The Subconscious Basement	Mentally go into your subconscious basement and put a few things in order by mentally placing our problems at the feet of Lord Siva. Begin to understand everything that has been placed in our subconscious mind from childhood until now. Inwardly work to carry no negative attachments to anything. That is, we are no longer holding onto old hates, jealousies, fears or misunderstandings--they have all been absorbed and dissolved in the cosmic river of life through the grace of our great God Siva. You have the power to change this state of mind and therefore to change your life. Today, go into your subconscious basement and see what is stored there that creates congestion or confusion in your life. Make a pledge to yourself to keep the subconscious basement orderly.63	Feel In Tune with Cosmic Energies	The next time you go to the temple or shrine room, stand before the inner sanctum and feel the shakti of the God emanating out to you, quieting mind and emotion. Then sit down in a quiet part of the temple or shrine room and feel that same cosmic energy within your own body, emanating out from your spine. Visualize the infinite energies of God Siva and, feel your own energies merging with Siva's. Feel yourself fully in harmony with the universe64	Merge Into The River	Mentally look at the great Ganges, flowing from Lord Siva's head, from the Himalayas down into the ocean. Relate this cosmic river of life to ourselves and see ourselves letting go of the banks of the river, merging ourselves into this river, flowing with it and realizing our Self as the essence of life. Let us not worry about the past ever again. Do not think about the past. Face everything that comes up in the light of the present, not in the darkness of the past.65	Release a Subconscious Experience	Discover within your subconscious mind one memory of an injustice or painful experience that you are still troubled by. Get a clear mental picture of the experience and the reactions it caused in you. Don't analyze. Simply be a witness, an observer. Then mentally release it, feeling the freedom of the breaking of negative bonds.66	Visualize a River	Visualize a river flowing into the sea, and see yourself holding onto the bank of the river and the river flowing on past you. Now, let go of the bank of the river and flow with the river until you merge into the sea of life. Feel yourself right at this instant living in the eternity of the moment. By holding on to the river banks, you hold the consciousness of time and space. By holding onto the banks of the river of life, you recreate within you fear, worry, doubt, anxiety, and perpetuate stress. Detach yourself from the banks of the river and again be free. Love the banks as you pass with a love born of understanding, and if you have no understanding of the banks, study out your negative attachments until you do.67	Breathe to Release Tensions	As we learn to breathe rhythmically and from the diaphragm, we also release tensions in the solar plexus. We learn to be spontaneous and free on the inside, and life force runs through us in an uninhibited way. We achieve and learn to maintain contentment, santosha. All of these things come through the simple techniques we practice while in meditation. But the practice of meditation is not the end. It is the total being of man that is the end to be sought for--the well-rounded, content, spontaneous being that is totally free.68	Observe Your Unspoken Affirmations	In your ongoing observation of your mind, become aware of the unspoken affirmations, the thoughts, that positively or negatively influence your actions. Notice how often you limit yourself when perhaps you need not. Seek to break out of these thought habits and to find new and expanded abilities within yourself.69	Identify Intellectual Barriers	Are there any intellectual barriers of doubt or skepticism still resident within you? Try to identify these impediments. Don't struggle with them. Simply observe them and they will be naturally dissolved in the light of understanding. You will come to know that the intellect is the greatest barrier on the inner path.70	Feel Siva's Closeness	Where is His body? His body is in the Third World, and your physical body is in the First World. Feel Siva's closeness to you even as you move in the world. It is a simple thing to do in the shrine room, but try to hold that consciousness all day long today.71	Feel That Which Has Never Changed	Sit quietly and feel that within you which has never changed, which is the same today as it was when you were a child. Something within you which you call you has not grown up or matured or changed in any way. Clearly identify it as yourself, as the very core of your being, that which sustains the outer mind.72	Use The Intellect in Wisdom	Never criticize or avoid the intellect. It is a most valuable phase of the mind of every human being. Used in wisdom, it can guide our steps along the San Marga. It is only when the intellect becomes rigid or opinionated that it is a barrier to deeper states of consciousness. Use the intellect, but don't let it dominate you.73	Reread Scripture	Today, read as quickly as you are able, inspiring scripture that you have already studied. Your subconscious will be quick to adjust itself to any new understanding that may be necessary for it to absorb, as you scan the pages one after another. Should you have the time, read the scripture again four, five or six times, but quickly, so that only what is pertinent to your subconscious will register. Your superconscious knows what your subconscious needs to know, record and adjust to at this particular time in your spiritual unfoldment on the path.74	Repeat This Affirmation Today	"I am now open to the flow of God Siva's cosmic energy, in which I perceive the most worthy course of action for this day. My service, being selfless, opens new doors of supply, making available all of the tools required so that my work will be beautiful, energetic and influential to the highest degree."76	Understand the Conscious Mind	Try to understand the conscious mind and our control of it by studying a simple example. Suppose we have a hundred pounds of conscious mind, enough to fit into a container fifty feet tall by seventy feet wide. Through the art of concentration, we are able to slowly condense or concentrate this one hundred pounds of conscious mind so that it will fit into a container one half the size. The benefits of doing this are as follows. We become dominant over the conscious mind and are able to consciously use it as a tool. Also, when the thought force is deliberately concentrated, it becomes very penetrating, as well as peaceful.78	Three Steps for Solving Problems	In solving today's problems, follow these simple steps: 1. First quiet the conscious mind and the body through diaphragmatic breathing. This will make you more aware and inhibit the intrusion of extraneous thoughts. 2. Set down the problem on paper; objectify it. 3. Concentrate on it, as you did while considering the aphorism: "The Conscious Mind is only one-tenth of the mind."79	There Is But One Mind	Concentrate now on the following aphorism and try to ferret out its deepest meaning. Begin by breathing diaphragmatically for a few minutes until you feel relaxed and at ease.   "There is but one mind. The consciousness, or ego, funcions within the mind's various phases. The one-tenth of the mind, of the conscious plane, in ramification, is carried on by its own novelty. The object is to control the conscious mind and become consciously conscious."80	Observing Things Around You	Attention sharpens our awareness. Try to sharpen your awareness by strengthening the observation of the physical things around you. This will awaken a great power of awareness within you. And even without external concentration being practiced, but by just being aware of our surroundings in the conscious mind during the day, we are able to improve our abilities on many levels. 81	Observe As If It Were The First Time	Today, as you walk down the street, closely observe the buildings and houses on both sides of the street. You may choose a street that you have walked down hundreds of times before, but now try to look at it as if this were the very first time. Be diligent in your observation. Take in the many details of color, size, embellishment, styles of architecture and degree of upkeep of each house. Also look from a wider perspective and study the overall feel of the houses and their relation to one another. What feeling or impression does the entire row of houses create in the mind? You will find yourself seeing things that you never saw before and gaining an entirely new appreciation for that street. 82	Practice Contemplation	Take a flower to your shrine room today. After puja, place it before you on the floor. Sit with spine erect, relaxed and alert, breathing from the diaphragm. Concentrate the mind only on the flower. Think of no unrelated thought. Observe the many distractions that arise, the natural tendency of the conscious mind to wander from object to object and the effort it takes to keep it one-pointed. Practice for ten minutes.83	Observe Houses Walk	Walk today down the street. Look at the houses and see if you can imagine what kind of people would live in each of them, assuming that each had chosen a house that suited his or her personality. Ask yourself questions like, "What would the people who live in that house look like? What special characteristics would they have? What moods would they be inclined toward?" If you see any residents entering or leaving the houses, see if they look like the people you have imagined living there. Perform this exercise for the next few days and then take time to reflect on what you have learned through practicing observation, both of your own personal will's dominance over awareness and the benefits that this can produce for you.84	Exercise in Awareness	Take a coin in your hand and observe it carefully. Let it grasp your attention. Look closely at all the engravings upon it. Notice its size and its color. Try to separate the actual object from the value people attach to it. Become aware of it as it is, then see if you can imagine its past and future. Think about the metal of which the coin is made. Imagine the ore in the earth, how it is mined and transported, then, the minting process. How many hands did it pass through before it came to you? What will its future be after it has passed out of your hands? How long will it remain in use? Then what will happen to it? Seek to sustain a series of 20, then 30, then 40 thoughts about the coin before an unrelated thought interrupts the sequence.85	What is your subconscious mind?	What is your subconscious mind? Think about this for a minute. Realize that eveything that has once passed through your conscious mind in the form of experience is resident right now within your subconscious. Not only that, but one of the most formidable discoveries of modern science, the DNA code, tells us that in the cellular structure of your body are all the experiences of your genetic history. The life, the biological evolution, of your forefathers is all registered in the molecular strands of your subconscious, capable of being recalled into memory.86	Form of Your Subconscious	Look into the mind today and try to intuit the form of your own subconscious. What have the sum total of experiences, which have passed through the conscious mind and been stored there, created? Why are grace and a good religious life more effective means of changing the subconscious than analysis or therapy?88	Awaken Your Willpower	How much willpower have you awakened today? Into what channels have you directed your personal willpower? The power of one­pointed concentration will be yours in proportion to the amount of willpower that you demonstrate each day. 89	Realize Something Everyday 	It is important to realize something every day. This draws forth your willpower and exercises it, giving you confidence in yourself. Begin first by realizing simple things. Try to realize. Try to realize. Try to realize something new and different each day. Realize the many different ways in which you can apply your personal willpower. You can perhaps choose a habit which you have but don't like, and use your personal will to overcome it. You can use your willpower to demand of yourself great achievements and humble obedience to the Yamas and Niyamas. 90	Willpower Leads to Realization	Personal willpower, with the grace of God Siva, leads to realization. Very often, the new devotee will ask, "How can I realize God?" We always answer in this way: "Realization is attained by awakening the indomitable spiritual willpower, the cosmic energy from within. Through the Grace of Lord Siva and the performance of sadhana, this will surely happen." Use your personal willpower ever second of every minute of the day to fulfill all your needs. 91	Study the Mind	Concentrate inwardly upon the mind. Find out what the mind is. Observe your mind, your thoughts, feelings and actions from within and know that your mind is yours to use because you control the mind with the spiritual will if you want to. Your thoughts wander if you allow them to, and your subconscious wavers when you let it. When that happens, people say they are con­fused, bewildered or in a state of anxiety. Study the mind in its simplicity and in its ramifications, and you will see for yourself exactly what the mind is.92	Develop Willpower With Everything You Do	Learn to use your willpower each day. Begin with little things at first. Become satisfied with everything that you do. To you it must be a work of art whether you are performing puja, cooking a meal, cleaning a floor, painting a picture or writing a letter. Your work must satisfy you. You must become a perfectionist unto yourself, but first decide on your standard of perfection. You must control the quality of your work. Take on no responsibility that you cannot handle. By doing this you will find that you have much more control over the physical body, your emotions and your thinking mind than you ever thought possible. 93	Cultivate Willpower	To cultivate your personal will, begin in this way. If you make up your mind to do something and receive  Lord Ganesha's Grace through prayer, then do it. Proceed with confidence. Do not let a negative mood make you a victim of procrastination. Finish each job that you begin. Keep each promise that you make. Fulfill each plan that you have put into motion, provided that it is true, kind, helpful and fulfills a need. The right thing for you to do may perhaps be the hardest. This then is the very thing that you should make yourself accomplish.94	Look Within At Your Physical Body	Look within your mind at your physical body and try to cognize its mental chemistry. Look at your physical body as a manifestation of the subconscious mind, a formula depicting a combination of various mental and astral chemi­cals: a little bit of love, a little bit of hate, a little bit of greatness, a little bit of kindness, some jealousy and a dash of fear. All these and more go into making the physical body. Let us use the physical body as our concentration today and realize it in its totality. Each time you perform this sadhana, try to bring through one new insight through concentrating on the physical body as a manifestation of the subconscious mind. The physical body is a formula of emo­tion, desires and feelings.95	Concentrate upon the Mind	Concentrate inwardly upon the mind. Find out what the mind is. Observe your mind, your thoughts, feelings and actions from within and know that your mind is yours to use because you control the mind with the spiritual will if you want to. Your thoughts wander if you allow them to, and your subconscious wavers when you let it. When that happens, people say they are con­fused, bewildered or in a state of anxiety. Study the mind in its simplicity and in its ramifications, and you will see for yourself exactly what the mind is.96	Meditate Before Sleep	Get into the habit of meditating before sleep each night. If you catch yourself dropping off to sleep while sitting for meditation, know that your meditation is over. The best thing to do is to deliberately go to sleep, because the spiritual power is gone and has to be invoked or opened up again. After getting ready for bed, sit in the lotus position and have a dynamic meditation for as long as you can. When you feel drowsy, you may deliberately put your body to sleep in this way. Mentally say to yourself, "Prana in the left leg, flow, go to sleep. Prana in the right leg, flow, go to sleep. Prana in the left arm, flow, go to sleep. Prana in the right arm, flow, go to sleep. Torso prana, flow, go to sleep. Head filled with inner light, go to sleep." The first thing you know, it's morning. 97	Create an Odic Sheath	You will achieve a great control over your pranic sheath by learning to breathe diaphragmatically. The following experiments, coupled with diaphragmatic breathing, will help you awaken your own knowledge of the controls over odic prana and your own odic pranic sheath. Take a deep breath through the nostrils, at the same time holding a mental picture of taking odic prana into the body from within the air. You may visualize it in the form of a vapor, like the odic prana you perhaps saw around your hand. Visualize the odic prana going all the way down to your solar plexus, while the air is only held in your lungs. The odic prana stays in your solar plexus while you exhale air from the lungs. From the solar plexus area, the odic prana will automatically flow through the muscle tissue to the blood and begin to store up in various nerve centers in reserve for future use. In mastering this exercise, you will build up the vital body energies and calm the nerves. It is not necessary to do this often, only when you feel the need of storing up odic prana. 98	Heal with Odic Prana	Odic prana is often used unknowingly for healing various physical distresses, emotional upsets and mental strains. A child runs to his mother; the odic prana coming from the mother, freely flowing toward the child, comforts any distress the child may be going through. The child runs off vigorously, taking a good supply of odic prana from his mother through absorption. You can supply odic prana to any part of your body that may be ailing, and gain some relief. For emotional distress, store odic prana in the solar plexus, and to relieve mental strain store it in the upper back and chest area.  As you inhale odic prana, draw a mental picture of the process. When you make a mental picture, you are also employing odic force to form the picture, for all mental pictures are made out of odic force. After the mental picture of the physical area in your body that is in distress is well formed, visualize the odic prana being sent to that particular organ or part of the body. Inhale, then hold your breath a few seconds as you visualize the odic prana flowing from the solar plexus to that area of your physical body. When you manage to flow enough odic prana into the distressed area of your physical body and the health body becomes more vibrant, you will notice the distress ease. Do this for short periods of time. Remember, inhale, hold a few seconds while sending the energy to the distressed area, then exhale the air, holding the odic prana in the part of the body that needs extra energy most. "Where awareness goes energy flows." All breathing should be through the nostrils, not the mouth, deep and slow, natural and rhythmic. 99	Build Up Odic Prana	Breathe deeply in and out, in and out, in and out. As you breathe in, feel as though you are pulling odic prana into you as well as air. As you breathe out, feel as though you are sending out the air, but keeping the odic prana in the body, all the time storing it in the solar plexus. Soon you should begin to feel full of energy, solid and stable. 100	See Odic Prana Around Your Fingers	Select a dimly lit place that you can use as a background against which to view your hand, such as a closet. Open your right hand, in which you have been storing odic prana, and hold it against the dark background. With your eyes half open, gaze at your hand relaxed. Don't try too hard. You should be able to see the odic prana around each of your fingers. It will be seen as a cloudy, vaporous substance. If you are in perfect health, the odic prana will be clearer and more readily apparent. Some sensitive yoga students can see the odic prana around the physical body of people.101	Yamas and Niyamas Affirmation	As an exercise in using your will, read the Yamas and Niyamas and choose the ones you feel you are having the most trouble in practicing. Write them down on a piece of paper and add them to the end of the affirmation, "I can, I will, I am able to accomplish what I plan." Repeat this affirmation the first thing in the morning, at least twenty-one times, feeling your willpower becoming stronger and stronger as you do. Do this for seven consecutive days, and you will find a new harmony with these ancient laws of the the mind, the Yamas and Niyamas, especially those which challenge you most.