Lesson 7 From Merging with Siva

A Path Of Love

We have been walking through the path of the many Śaiva saints on our garden temple lands. Together we have looked back through history and seen real people living real lives, doing pragmatic things, sometimes foolish things, some even hurtful. There were workers among them, royalty, housewives, yogīs, businessmen, a spiritual community divided by caste but with one thing only in common. They all loved Śiva. That is their heritage. That is their message: that there is hope for all of us on this path to Śiva, hope of attaining His grace. These men and women will be remembered as they were for thousands of years. On this path, you don’t have to be a great ṛishi or a highly trained yogī. You don’t have to be a great philosopher. You don’t have to know Sanskrit. Just love God, which is the Life of the life within everyone. And to realize that God is the Light of the light within everyone, you have to be very simple, very uncomplicated, so that obvious realization can manifest through your conscious mind, through your subconscious mind, through your superconscious mind.

It’s very simple: the energy within our body is the same energy that pervades the universe, and it’s all emanating right out of Lord Śiva. It’s very simple: the light that lights our thoughts, that light doesn’t care—it has no preferences—whether it’s a good thought or not a good thought. That light is illuminating every thought. Take away the thoughts, and you realize that you are just light.

The path of Śaiva Siddhānta, as you all know, is a very simple path. It’s the path of love, a path of devotion, which makes you want to be self-disciplined, because to maintain a feeling of love all the time, you have to be self-disciplined. You don’t discipline yourself to attain the feeling of love. You attain the feeling of love and then you want to discipline yourself because you love the discipline, because it brings more love.

The path of Śaiva Siddhānta is worshiping God on the outside and realizing God on the inside, and when the two come together—transformation! That means that you’re different than you were. You have different desires. You have different motivations, different goals in life, because you’ve been transformed. You look at your previous life and you say, “That’s another person.” Why? Because you have found something real on the inside of you. Thoughts on the inside of you—they’re not real, they’re always changing. Feelings on the inside of you—they’re not real, they’re always changing. Śiva on the inside of you is right there—never changes. Those of you who hear the nāda, it’s the same inner sound, morning, noon and night, 365 days a year. The light that lights your thoughts, 365 days a year, twenty-four hours a day, is the same. It lights up your dreams also. And the energy of your body—all coming from Śiva.

Śiva is so close to you. The Nayanars, the saints of Tamil Śaivism, teach us a great lesson. They did so much wrong, but they survived with just the love of Śiva and maintained that love without anything getting in the way of it. Of course, if you love Śiva, obviously you have to love everyone else. Love brings forgiveness. Love brings understanding. Love brings feeling.

All Śaivites of the world love Śiva. They love each other, and they love the Vaishṇavites, the Śāktas, the Smārtas, the tribal Hindus and everyone in the world, because Śiva’s energy is working through everyone in the entire world—plants, trees, animals, fish, birds. It’s so simple. The object of the lesson is to make yourself a very simple, uncomplicated person. Aum Namaḥ Śivāya.

   