Lesson 14 From Merging with Siva

Waiting for Intuitive Flashes

Go again and again and again, and finally you would become deeply involved with yourself and the people around you, and you will start having a new set of experiences. Someone’s eating popcorn on the left side and someone’s smoking on the right side, and you get up and move. The very first time you went to see the movie, you were not even conscious of anyone around you.

And finally, after going to this same movie for two weeks, you sit down and you start breathing and going within yourself, and you are not conscious of someone on the left side or someone on the right side, or the film or the light penetrating the film or what is on the film. You are breathing and going within yourself, and you begin to enjoy the bliss of your own being. That is what a mystic does in life. That’s a wonderful meditation. If you don’t want to go to the same film two or three weeks, night after night after night, well then just pretend that you do. Meditate on it, and in the course of a short meditation you will see how a mystic lives his life. Now, of course, one film and its nerve-wracking experiences conquered, there’s always another film being played in town, and you could start right over again—the same thing we do in our experiences. We go through one set of experiences. We react to them. We go within ourselves. We lose consciousness of the experience itself because we know how it was created. We studied it out so well. It has come to us in intuitive flashes. Then we go into the next movie, the next scene.

Now, when the mystic wants to understand his series of experiences, he does not analyze himself. He doesn’t go through the emotion of “Why did this happen to me?” “What did I do to deserve that?” “What did this experience come to me for? I want to know the reason, and only when I know the reason can I go on.” This binds him to the intellectual area of the mind. He lives his experiences in the consciousness of the eternity of the moment, and if an intuitive flash, a mountaintop consciousness, comes to him where he can see how he fit into the experiential pattern, he accepts it and he knows it’s right, because it permeates him so dramatically, from the top of his head right through his entire body.

The mystic waits for these intuitive flashes, and he links one up with another. But he doesn’t flow his awareness through the intellectual mind and spend time in that area to try to analyze each happening or each reaction to try to justify it, to excuse it or to find out why it has happened. He doesn’t do that. Why? Because the soul, the superconscious mind, doesn’t work that way.

       