Lesson 99 From Merging with Siva

Restraints and  Observances

When we are children, we run freely, because we have no great subconscious burdens to carry. Very little has happened to us. Of course, our parents and religious institutions try to prepare us for life’s tests. But because the conscious mind of a child doesn’t know any better, it generally does not accept the preparation without experience, and life begins the waking up to the material world, creating situations about us—magnificent opportunities for failing these tests. If we do not fail, we know that we have at some prior time learned the lesson inherent in the experience. Experience gives us a bit of wisdom when we really face ourselves and discover the meaning of failure and success. Failure is just education. But you shouldn’t fail once you know the law.

There have been many systems and principles of ethics and morality established by various world teachers down through the ages. All of these have had only one common goal—to provide for man living on the planet Earth a guidepost for his thought and action so that his consciousness, his awareness, may evolve to the realization of life’s highest goals and purposes. The ancient yoga systems provided a few simple yamas and niyamas for religious observance, defining how all people should live. The yamas, or restraints, provided a basic system of discipline for the instinctive mind. The niyamas, or positive observances, are the affirming, life-giving actions and disciplines. From the holy Vedas we have assembled here ten yamas and ten niyamas, a simple statement of the ancient and beautiful laws of life. 

The Ten Yamas, Restraints for Proper Conduct from the Vedas

Noninjury, ahiṁsā: Not harming others by thought, word, or deed.

Truthfulness, satya: Refraining from lying and betraying promises. 

Nonstealing, asteya: Neither stealing, nor coveting nor entering into debt. 

Divine conduct, brahmacharya: Controlling lust by remaining celibate when single, leading to faithfulness in marriage. 

Patience, kshamā: Restraining intolerance with people and impatience with circumstances. 

Steadfastness, dhṛiti: Overcoming nonperseverance, fear, indecision and changeableness. 

Compassion, dayā: Conquering callous, cruel and insensitive feelings toward all beings. 

Honesty, straightforwardness, ārjava: Renouncing deception and wrongdoing. 

Moderate appetite, mitāhāra: Neither eating too much nor consuming meat, fish, fowl or eggs. 

Purity, śaucha: Avoiding impurity in body, mind and speech. 

The Ten Niyamas, Observances For Spiritual Life from the Vedas

Remorse, hrī: Being modest and showing shame for misdeeds. 

Contentment, santosha: Seeking joy and serenity in life. 

Giving, dāna: Tithing and giving generously without thought of reward. 

Faith, āstikya: Believing firmly in God, Gods, guru and the path to enlightenment. 

Worship of the Lord, Īśvarapūjana: The cultivation of devotion through daily worship and meditation. 

Scriptural listening, siddhānta śravaṇa: Studying the teachings and listening to the wise of one’s lineage. 

Cognition, mati: Developing a spiritual will and intellect with the guru’s guidance. 

Sacred vows, vrata: Fulfilling religious vows, rules and observances faithfully. 

Recitation, japa: Chanting mantras daily. 

Austerity, tapas: Performing sādhana, penance, tapas and sacrifice. 