Lesson 264 From Merging with Siva

The High “eee” Sound

Within the quantum level of consciousness there originates a vibration, a steady vibration, that can be heard with the inner ear as a high-pitched “eeeee,” as if a thousand vīṇās were playing, as if all the nerve currents in the astral body, physical body and the body of the soul were singing in harmony. It is a divine combination of the iḍā and piṅgalā tones blended together in the sushumṇā. Each lineage of gurus has embedded within the psyche of tradition a certain combination of sounds, and listening to this mystic sound holds all devotees close to their satguru and all those who preceded him. It is also said that when one is in another birth, the sound is the same, and this will eventually lead the aspirant back to his spiritual lineage. Listening to the nāda, as it is called in Sanskrit, or nāda-nāḍī śakti, brings the threshold of bliss and shows that the balance of all karmas has been attained. Listening to the nāda and tracing it into its source carries the seeker’s awareness to the brink of the Absolute. There are today mystical orders that do nothing but listen to the nāda while looking at and enjoying the darshan of their guru’s picture.

Many sincere seekers wonder why they cannot hear “eeeeee,” the nāda, during their meditation, whereas others not only hear it during meditation but during the day when talking, shopping or just meandering through the garden. This is to say, it is there when awareness enters that area of the mind. The mind has to be made empty. That means resolving all unresolved conflicts within the subconscious. The striving to hear the nāda will bring up unresolved issues. They may plague the conscious mind until resolved. At first you might disregard them and feel they will go away as abruptly as they came. But later, when they persist, and the major one is deception—yes, we can even deceive ourselves—we are inwardly forced to face up to, admit our secrets and make amends. When deception goes, the nāda comes. When the subconscious is heavy, the nāda and the brilliant colors it radiates fade. Failure on the path puts the nāda out of range of the inner ear of the soul.

The mystical nāda, it’s a medley of sounds, and each sound which is there has a color, but may be covered, as is the light of the mind of the soul, the clear white light. It is covered, but not permanently. Admittance of the mistakes, the experience of repentance and the performance of penance, called prāyaśchitta, lay the foundation for a reconciliation that will release the force of lower nature into the higher and uncloud the veil that hid the inner light, that hid the nāda—that incomprehensible high-pitched “eee,” sounding within the head, that incomparable source of inner security, contentment and outpouring of love. When you hear the nāda, endeavor to project it in love’s outpouring to all those who are in your orbit of communication. They will feel the blessings when your divine love is projected through your nāda into their nāda. This is the height of selfless consciousness, universal love, a constant, mystical outpouring and experience of oneness. The sushumṇā is nāda and more. Nāda śakti is. It just is. 