Lesson 267 From Merging with Siva

Distinguishing The Two Paths

There are two traditional paths for the devout Hindu of nearly every lineage. The first is the path of the renunciate. The second is the path of the householder, who guides human society and produces the next generation. The ancient ṛishis evolved well-defined principles for both, knowing that unmarried aspirants would most easily unfold by adhering to principles of nonownership, noninvolvement in the world and brahmacharya, while married men and women would uphold the more complex and material family dharma. Though the principles or guidelines for these two paths are different, the goal is the same: to establish a life dedicated to spiritual unfoldment, hastening the evolution of the soul through knowledge of the forces at work within us, and wise, consistent application of that knowledge.

In our Holy Orders of Sannyāsa, the two lifestyles of Hindu renunciates are described as follows. “Some among them are sādhus, anchorites living in the seclusion of distant caves and remote forests or wandering as homeless mendicants, itinerant pilgrims to the holy sanctuaries of Śaivism. Others dwell as cenobites, assembled with their brothers, often in the āśrama, aadheenam or maṭha of their satguru, but always under the guru’s aegis, serving together in fulfillment of a common mission. These devotees, when initiated into the order of sannyāsa, don the saffron robes and thereby bind themselves to a universal body of Hindu renunciates, numbering today three million, whose existence has never ceased, an assembly of men inwardly linked in Śivasambandha, their mutual dedication to Śiva, though not necessarily outwardly associated.”

We can thus see that in the strictest traditions, the renunciate path includes only those who have received initiation, sannyāsa dīkshā, from a qualified preceptor, for only they have fully and irrevocably renounced the world and closed off all other options for their future. However, depending on the tradition, the renunciate path broadly includes the wandering sādhu, or homeless mendicant, and the sādhaka under vows preparing for sannyāsa at some future time.

We have studied the three primary currents in the human nerve system. The aggressive-intellectual current is masculine, mental in nature and psychically seen as blue in color. This current is termed in Sanskrit piṅgalā. The passive-physical current is feminine, material in nature. This current, which is pink or red, is known as iḍā. The third current is spiritual in nature and flows directly through the spine and into the head. Being yellowish-white, the sushumṇā, as it is called, is the channel for pure spiritual energies that flood into the body through the spine and out into the 6,000 miles of nerve currents. Depending on the nature and dharma, each individual’s energy expresses itself as predominantly physical or intellectual—passive or aggressive—or spiritual. However, in the sannyāsin the two forces are so precisely balanced that neither is dominant, and he therefore lives almost totally in sushumṇā. The monastic, whether a monk or a nun, is in a sense neither male nor female, but a being capable of all modes of expression.

At times, the renunciate’s sādhana is austere, as he burns layer after layer of dross through severe tapas. He wears the saffron robe, studies the ancient ways and scriptures. He chants the sacred mantras. He reflects constantly on the Absolute. He lives from moment to moment, day to day. He is always available, present, open. He has neither likes nor dislikes, but clear perceptions. 