Lesson 273 From Merging with Siva

A New Spiritual Birth

“Through experience the soul learns of the nature of joy and sorrow, learns well to handle the magnetic forces of the world. Only when that learning is complete is true sannyāsa possible. Otherwise, the soul, still immature, will be drawn back into the swirl of experience, no matter what vows have been uttered. True renunciation comes when the world withdraws from the devotee. Sannyāsa is for the accomplished ones, the great souls, the evolved souls. Sannyāsa is not to be misinterpreted as a means of getting something—getting enlightenment, getting puṇya, or merit. Sannyāsa comes when all getting is finished. It is not to get something, but because you are something, because you are ready to give your life and your knowledge and your service to Śaivism, that you enter the life of the sannyāsin. The kavi, or saffron robes, are the royal insignia of the sannyāsin. Those in kavi the world over are your brethren, and you should feel one with each of these hundreds of thousands of soldiers within.

“The ideals of renunciation as practiced in the Sanātana Dharma are outlined fully in these Holy Orders of Sannyāsa. Live up to them as best you can. You need not be a saint or jīvanmukta to enter into the ancient world order of sannyāsa. Renunciation in its inmost sense is a gradual process. It does not happen instantly when a vow is spoken. Do not mistake sannyāsa dīkshā as the end of effort, but look upon it as a new spiritual birth, the beginning of renewed striving and even more difficult challenges. There will remain karmas to be lived through as the soul continues to resolve the subtle attachments, or vāsanās, of this and past lives. It is enough that you have reached a knowing of the necessity of tyāga. It is enough that you renounce in the right spirit and pledge yourself to meet each challenge as befits this tradition, bringing honor to yourself and your religion.

“Finally, you are charged with preserving and defending the Śaiva Dharma teachings of the Nandinātha Sampradāya’s Kailāsa Paramparā as brought forth in The Master Course trilogy of Dancing, Living and Merging with Śiva, and in The Holy Bible of the Śaivite Hindu Religion. You are cautioned against being influenced by alien faiths or beliefs. You are the vault, the repository, wherein are kept the priceless treasures of Śaivism, secure and available for future generations. All who accept these Holy Orders accept a selfless life in which all monastics work their minds together, thus keeping the saṅgam strong and effective. You must not veer from the San Mārga, nor follow an individual path, nor remain remote or aloof from your brother monastics. It is a serious life which you now enter, one which only a sannyāsin can fully undertake. Remember and teach that God is, and is in all things. Spread the light of the One Great God, Śiva—Creator, Preserver and Destroyer, immanent and transcendent, the Compassionate One, the Gracious One, the One without a second, the Lord of Lords, the Beginning and End of all that is. Anbe Sivamayam Satyame Parasivam.” 

   