Lesson 275 From Merging with Siva

Maintaining A Balance 

Should the woman become aggressively intellectual and the man become passively physical, then forces in the home are disturbed. The two bicker and argue. Consequently, the children are upset, because they only reflect the vibration of the parents and are guided by their example. Sometimes the parents separate, going their own ways until the conflicting forces quiet down. But when they come back together, if the wife still remains in the piṅgalā channel, and the husband in the iḍā channel, they will generate the same inharmonious conditions. It is always a question of who is the head of the house, he or she? The head is always the one who holds the prāṇas within the piṅgalā. Two piṅgalā spouses in one house, husband and wife, spells conflict.

The balancing of the iḍā and piṅgalā into sushumṇā is, in fact, the pre-ordained spiritual sādhana, a built in sādhana, or birth sādhana, of all family persons. To be on the spiritual path, to stay on the spiritual path, to get back on the spiritual path, to keep the children on the spiritual path, to bring them back to the spiritual path, too—as a family, father, mother, sons and daughters living together as humans were ordained to do without the intrusions of uncontrolled instinctive areas of the mind and emotions—it is imperative, it is a virtual command of the soul of each member of the family, that these two forces, the iḍā and piṅgalā, become and remain balanced, first through understanding and then through the actual accomplishment of this sādhana. There can be no better world, no new age, no golden future, no peace, no harmony, no spiritual progress until this happens and is perpetuated far into the future. This is the sādhana of the father. This is the sādhana of the mother. And together they are compelled by divine law to teach this sādhana to their offspring, first by example, then through explanation of their example, as youths mature into adulthood. Those unfortunate couples who neglect or refuse to perform this sādhana—of balancing the iḍā and piṅgalā, and from time to time bringing both into the sushumṇā—are indeed distressed by their own neglect. At the time of death, as their life ebbs into the great unknown, they will, in looking back, see nothing but turmoil, misunderstanding, hurts—physical hurts, emotional hurts, mental hurts. Their subconscious will still be hurting, and they will know the hurt they gave to others will follow them into the next world, then into the next, to be reexperienced. Their pain knows no cure during their last few hours before transition from the physical body into one of the astral worlds they earned access to, as their good deeds, misdeeds and wrongful deeds are gathered together and totalled. Therefore, it is for the wise, the understanding, the hopeful parents to follow the iḍā-piṅgalā-sushumṇā sādhana daily, weekly, monthly, yearly. This is the path for the family persons toward merger with Śiva. It truly is. 