Lesson 291 From Merging with Siva

Striving and One’s Dharma

Many seekers want a future of wealth, family and friends and they want the very highest spiritual illumination, too. This is their spiritual pride setting an unrealistic pattern. We must remember that after one renounces the world, with his entering the higher chakras—viśuddha, ājñā and sahasrāra—the world renounces the individual. If married, he no longer can fulfill his purusha dharma, his family duties. He can no longer hold employment that offers benefits for longevity. His perspective of the world and advancement in it has been changed forever. As a ship floats aimlessly on the ocean without a rudder, so does the unprepared soul meander who has forced his way, uninvited through initiation, into the realm of the saints and sages of Sanātana Dharma. This is why householders and all who have not properly prepared themselves, been well schooled and tested by a competent preceptor, should not go too deeply into rāja or kuṇḍalinī yoga practices.

If they are prone to anger, jealousy, contempt and retaliation, they should abstain from any of the yogas of japa or exploratory meditation. These will only intensify and prāṇanize the lower chakras that give rise to demonic forces. Rather, they should perform the always healing vāsanā daha tantra and confine themselves to karma yoga, such as cleaning in and around the temple and picking flowers for the pūjās. These simple acts of charyā are recommended, but should be not extended to intense worship.

Then, and only then, their life will be in perspective with the philosophy of Sanātana Dharma and begin to become one with Śiva’s perfect universe. Brahmadvara, the door to the seven chakras below the mūlādhāra, will then be sealed off as their experiential patterns settle into the traditional perspective of how life should be and each individual should behave within it.

The use of drugs is another foreboding danger, for certain stimulants set in motion the kuṇḍalinī simultaneously into higher and lower regions. For instance, when the user of drugs, like an intruder, forces his way into the experience of the oneness of the universe, the totality of now-ness and all-being, by touching into the fourth chakra, anāhata, simultaneously every other center below the anāhata is stimulated, meaning svādhishṭhāna and the first, third, fifth and seventh below the base of the spine—the centers of reason, fear, jealousy, selfishness and malice. Noticeable mood swings of those who rely on drugs hamper the person throughout life. Only severe prāyaśchitta, penance, can set the course toward spiritual healing. 