Lesson 315 From Merging with Siva

Yoking the Inner Worlds

An advanced adept can, in meditation, travel in the ākāśa, too. He can go to India, Sri Lanka, America, in three different ways: by projecting himself mentally “out there” in the ākāśa, by sitting and bringing Sri Lanka here, or by traveling in his astral body and actually being there. People would see him there if they were inwardly awakened. The great devas or Gods visit temples and participate in keeping the darshan vibration going strong. They help the satgurus, too. They help the disciples of the satgurus by giving a wonderful psychic protection. They can usually be contacted by ringing a bell.

The bell is one of the things that penetrates in vibration into the ākāśa. If you trace the evanescent tones of a bell in and in and in, right into the light, it will be the last sound you will hear before soundlessness occurs. All other sounds will fade away, and you will only hear the bell, as the last overtone of sound. On the tone of a bell, you can bring a yogī safely out of deep meditation. He will begin to hear that sound and will come out into normal consciousness after a while. Otherwise you might talk to him, and he might not even hear you. You can awaken a sleeper out of deep sleep by ringing a bell softly. The soft tones of the bell will penetrate into the depths of his sleep or meditation and bring him out in a very nice way into physical consciousness. As a bell is the first, so the flame is the second thing that penetrates that deeply into consciousness.

The inner-plane being, once contacted, would then use the water on your home altar to put in all of the accumulated unwholesome vibrations found in the room. He would then charge the stone on the altar with his darshan. The inner-plane being or deva would come to the pūjā, summoned by the bell. The power of the flame would give him the ability to work within the room, and he would go around collecting all the negative vibrations from everybody, old karma and magnetic collections of thought and emotion, and put it all in the water. After the pūjā, the water should be thrown out. It may start to get cloudy. In the meditation room, the water should always be kept fresh, because it even collects odic force on its own.

The odic force is what causes all the problems on Earth. Water itself is odic force, so it collects the conflicting vibrations in its elements. The actinic forces do motivate odic forces, as well as create odic force. So, when in the large temples of India the ceremony is at a certain pitch and height, the darshan of the Deity that the temple is built for is felt because He visits the temple in his spiritual body. He might just come for a short period of time, but the vibration of the darshan is felt in a very dynamically uplifting way, a vibration similar to that of a satguru, but different because it comes from an inner plane. It protects one from old experiences coming up from the subconscious to repeat themselves, karmas that perhaps might take years to live through again. This inner protection is one of the many wonderful ways that darshan works for the good of people on the path.

   