Lesson 334 From Merging with Siva

The Body Of the Soul

All concepts of time, space, mind, universe, microcosm and macrocosm are what occur when inhabiting a physical body. But they are only concepts, not relating to what actually occurs. The seven chakras of the physical body produce their frameworks, relationships. The Self, the realization of God, Paraśiva, is immanent now within everyone, only realizable according to the soul’s evolution, which can be hastened through the practice of yoga. Therefore, to look for realizations through correlations or to seek correlations as destinations is futile. This is because what you seek after already exists in its fullness within each soul.

Those in the kevala avasthā are creating forms around the soul and are not inwardly directed. Those in the sakala avasthā are deciphering their creations and not interested. Those in the śuddha avasthā perceive, little by little, a fullness—that within which has never changed since the first cell broke away containing within it the fullness of Śiva, His samādhi as well as form.

Our soul is an immortal, effulgent being of light created by God Śiva in His image and evolving to union with Him. Its uncreated divine essence is Pure Consciousness and Absolute Reality, eternally one with Śiva. The unfoldment of the soul through the avasthās of existence can be understood in the analogy of the fragrant lotus rising above the water, drawn up by the sun, having come from the mud below. The mud is kevala, the lotus and its blossoming is sakala, and the sun is śuddha.

One day you will see the being of you, your divine soul body. You will see it inside the physical body. It looks like clean, clear plastic. Around it is a blue light, and the outline of it is whitish yellow. Inside of it is blue-yellowish light, and there are trillions of little nerve currents, or quantums, and light scintillating all through that. This body stands on a lotus flower. Inwardly looking down through your feet, you see you are standing on a big, beautiful lotus flower. This body has a head, it has eyes, and it has infinite intelligence. It is tuned into and feeds from the source of all energy.

The soul form, which is another way of naming the “soul body,” evolves as its consciousness evolves, becoming more and more refined until finally it is at the same intensity or refinement as the Primal Soul. The experiences of life, in all the various planes of consciousness, are “food for the soul,” reaping lessons that actually raise the level of intelligence and love. Thus, very refined souls are walking intelligences, beaming with love. The “soul body” is not like any other body, because it is the Being itself, not an encasement for the being.

I chose the term soul body many years ago to convey the very real fact that souls do have a human-like form that can be seen in mystic, superconscious vision. It was a way of describing the actual nature of the soul, which is not simply a ball of intelligence, or a point of awareness. But the body of the soul cannot be separated from the soul. They are one and the same. If you take away the form of the soul, all bonds are broken and jīva becomes Śiva.