Lesson 336 From Merging with Siva

Birth of the Golden Body

The golden body, svarṇaśarīra, is a body made of golden light. After many experiences of Paraśiva, it gradually descends from the seven chakras above the sahasrāra into the ājñā chakra, which then becomes the soul’s mūlādhāra, then down into the viśuddha chakra, which then becomes its mūlādhāra, and then down into the anāhata, which then becomes its mūlādhāra.

All seven chakras above the sahasrāra slowly come down and down and down until the entire astral body is psychically seen, by mystics who have this sight, as a golden body. The astral body slowly, slowly, slowly dissolves into the golden body. That is what I have seen happen. That is what our paramparā and our sampradāya know from experience. Experience is the only true knowing—a knowing that can be verified in books, through others who have the same knowing, but a knowing that no others know who have not had the same experience. To them it is only a concept, a nice one maybe, but just a concept or written off as an opinion.

When the golden body fully enters the physical, having taken over the astral, the knowing that is known comes unbidden. It is beyond reason but does not conflict with it. It is a living scripture but does not conflict with those written by seers of the past who have seen and their records have become scripture. So great is the Sanātana Dharma that it defies all who doubt it, all who disdain it, all who disregard it, all who degrade it, with personal realization of its Truth.

This golden body, which begins to build into a golden body after the experience of nirvikalpa samādhi, is connected to the sahasrāra chakra. In other words, the sahasrāra chakra is the home base in the physical body for the golden body. There are twelve basic unfoldments to this chakra as the golden body grows. When the realized sannyāsin travels in high states of contemplation, he moves freely in his golden body and can help and serve mankind. Over time, he gains a conscious control of the sahasrāra chakra as a force center which propels him into inner space.

It is this golden body, as it refines and refines and refines itself within the Śivaloka after moksha, that finally merges with Śiva like a cup of water being poured into the ocean. That same water can never be found and put back into the cup. This truly is svarṇaśarīra viśvagrāsa, the final, final, final merging with Śiva.

   