Lesson 338 From Merging with Siva

Bringing Others Into Realization

The lesson I want to point out is that once the soul has realized the Self, it is now on the road to realizing it again, and realizing it again and again. It is just as simple as that, and the warning that I would give is: do not become fascinated in the aftermath of any experience of the Self—so that the inner mind is always reaching for the highest samādhi, not being intrigued with the superconscious that is after samādhi. When one is intrigued with the superconsciousness after samādhi, this builds up the forces, not only of the mind but all the psychic forces, and brings the maṭhavāsi into a realm of occultism. This is something to guard against, because when he is intrigued with the aftermath, with the possibilities and the ramifications of the mind, this will eventually lead him around and around in circles, because the mind can offer nothing other than ramifications. In the beginning teachings, all devotees learn that the mind created itself, created itself and created itself. Well, even the superconscious mind does this.

What must be really sought after, in order for one as a Self-Realized person to fulfill his destiny of bringing others into Self Realization, is a pure samādhi which will keep the pure teachings of advaita yoga alive on the Earth through the sannyāsins. Everything on Earth comes through people. Everything of advanced knowledge has come through people. Self Realization is the pure teachings of yoga attained on the Earth through people who talk, breathe, live just like the Self-Realized soul does.

If he goes into nirvikalpa samādhi and becomes ramified in the psychic powers that come after samādhi, after his first samādhi, his second samādhi, his third samādhi, he will become more intense and will realize new possibilities within himself. If he remains on those planes of the phenomena of the occultism of the mind, then he gains new and fascinating powers of the mechanism of the mind, but he loses the power to bring others along the path into samādhi. If the renunciate maintains a clean samādhi and comes back into the mind, he realizes he has had some extrasensory perceptions, and he does not use them. He does not use them at all unless, of course, he uses them quite naturally, just as naturally as he would enjoy a meal, but he does not dwell on supernatural powers as anything special. He is at every point in time just who he is.

What the renunciate is taught to dwell on would be the next time and the next time he would be going into samādhi. Then he awakens a strong current within himself that can bring others into samādhi. By dropping off unessential powers, he gains one great power. That is the one great power that those who have realized the Self want, the power to bring others into Self Realization. You can only do that by having first attained a pure Self Realization yourself and going into samādhi again and again and again. Remember, the sannyāsin’s destiny is this: having realized the Self, bring others into the pure realization of the Self, and teach other sannyāsins to go into samādhi and come out with a well-balanced mind, without deviating one way or another on the psychic planes. 