Lesson 354 From Merging with Siva

Exit via the Highest Chakra

Many have asked what is meant by leaving through a certain chakra at the point of death? Let’s take an example of a person of whom people say, “His mind is in his butt.” They mean his awareness is down at the bottom, so to speak. He is ogling pornography. He’s swearing, angry, self-indulgent all the time. That is the world he would go into if he died in this state of mind, the lower world of selfish self-gratification, where lust is not lust, but a way of life, for nothing else is happening but that—just lust, twenty-four hours a day. Or it is sometimes said, “She is such a motherly woman. She is all heart, really a sensitive lady.” That is where she would go at the moment of death—out through the throat chakra, the universal love chakra, and experience a heaven world beyond expectations, beyond descriptions of any kind. Just as a traveling businessman would go to a hotel where others have come for similar purposes, she would go to a world where everybody is a heart person. That is why you cannot spiritually unfold so much in the inner world, because everybody is the same in each stratum of consciousness. You would have to study and do disciplines to get into the next chakras, but you would never have the lower ones to contend with if you had not been in the lower ones during your physical life.

If somebody dies in the states of anger and fear, he goes into the lower worlds of those states of consciousness. And in that realm there would be hundreds of thousands of people in that same state of consciousness. Whatever is in the mind at that moment—a country, a family, community—will have a strong impact on where he goes in the inner world, and on the nature of future saṁskāras. The thoughts at death are the next saṁskāras of the astral body. Even if you have the thought, “When you’re dead, you’re dead,” your astral body might just float over your physical body and be “dead.” Someone would have to revive you and explain to you that you are in your astral body and are as alive as you ever were, but not physically.

At death, you leave through a nerve ganglia of consciousness, a chakra. Most people live in about three chakras, and they see-saw back and forth among those states of mind. Each one is a window, and at death it becomes a portal, a doorway. So, it is the state of mind at death that gets you into one loka or another within the Śivaloka, Devaloka, Pretaloka or Narakaloka.

The ideal is to leave through the top of the head, through the door of Brahman, to get into the Brahmaloka and not have to come back. The dying person should at the time of transition concentrate awareness at the top of his head and willfully draw up into it all the energies from the left and right legs and arms, one after another, then the energy within the entire torso, and all the energies within the spine, from the mūlādhāra chakra up into the ājñā and sahasrāra. With all the energies gathered at the top of his head, he will leave through the highest chakra he experienced this lifetime. This would put him in a great place in the inner world.

Maybe at age eighteen he reached the viśuddha chakra for a very short time. He will revive that experience just before death as he is going through the playback of his life, and he will go out through that chakra. But if he is thinking about lower things, he will go out through the lower chakras. If he goes out through a lower chakra, or portal, he can in the inner world eventually work his way back to the viśuddha chakra, with a lot of help from the devonic guides and their advisors, but he cannot go beyond it until he gets a new physical body.

The portal is where the physical eyes hook into or go into. Through that portal you go into that world. This is why a departing person, in the spirit of kaivalya, perfect detachment or aloneness, gazes at pictures of God, Gods and guru, and sings or listens to hymns sung by loved ones, so that the experience of death truly does take him to the highest plane he experienced in this birth, or even higher if he experienced a higher state in a previous birth.

The astral body carries the chakras. The chakras are in the astral body. The astral body lives in the physical body, and when death comes, it is going to live without the physical body. The same chakras are within it. At the moment of death, you have the opportunity to stabilize yourself in the highest chakra you have experienced in this life.