Himalayan Academy, the publisher of this and other apps, never sells or gives any information about it's users to a third party. In order to facilitate users' experience our apps do keep track of your activities in order to provide users with a history/journal of their activities, bookmarks, favorites, playlists, and other settings you may have used to customize your personal app experience. In order to do this we do provide you with a random user identification number which includes a date of installation such as 

A1Z24_February–02-17

But our apps do not attach any personal information to this ID, we also do not access any personal information outside of our app that may be on your device. As such even though we track the users activities, the date of installation, your user ID does not give us any personal information about who you are, we do not know your name or your email address.

Although we may store your user ID and history of your app activities in the cloud, this information is only attached to your random ID and we have no idea who the user may actually be.

Our our apps may offer opt-in settings where you can supply a username, email address, country, city, age, gender, birth date, phone number (for messages, notifications) but this is entirely voluntary. This would allow us to provide easy sharing options and enable notifications in the future. At a minimum, although we cannot guarantee it, if you provide a user name and email address there is the possibility that in the event that you lose your phone or wipe your device data then all of your journal activity, history, bookmarks, favorites, playlists and other custom settings, possibly, may be restored. None of this information would ever be released to a 3rd party for any reason. Also it should be noted that information related to sharing via your other social apps is never stored in the cloud. Your Twitter, Facebook, What's App log in information is stored on your device, remain private to you and we do not keep this information. In the event of restoring settings you would need to reenter information for sharing. 

But if you choose not to provide any use any information then all of your history, bookmarks, settings etc will be lost.



