Lesson 237 From Living with Siva

Growing Old Gracefully

A short while ago I had the privilege of visiting a rest home for elderly ladies. Being experienced in looking at people and discerning the type of lives they had lived, seeing these ladies who sat grumbling, I could see the types of lives they lived in their marriages. I would say that all but two in the entire group had hung divorce over their husband’s head all through life. That is how they got their way: “If you don’t give me what I want, I will divorce you!” But there were two souls sitting there who were also suffering, but they were happy. They had an inner joy. The conditions weren’t too good—they never are in such places—but these two souls sat happily observing, and I could see that they were understanding what they observed. That is the secret of growing old, being able to understand what you observe.

To grow old gracefully—and to get away from the habit of just growing old naturally and thus physically and emotionally losing the spirit entirely—you have to plan ahead. You have to know where you are going. Everyone who goes on in life is going to get old, believe it or not. But we can pass through those years beautifully, providing the balance is right. You get that right balance by following good advice and conquering the mistakes that you have made in the past and making them right.

When we are selfish, self-centered and flare up and lose control of ourselves, we are like animals. When we reflect understanding, have control of ourselves and use our will to conquer our lower nature, we are using the Godly part of our mind. That’s why I say people do just exactly what they want to do. It is either the spiritual being that is stronger, or the animal within them that is stronger. If they control the animal nature, then what happens? The spiritual being automatically takes over.

If they live according to the rules of the animal nature, then what happens? They snuff out the spirit, they snuff out life, and they decay. Decay immediately sets in. It is terrible to think about, but that’s the rule. That’s what happens. That’s why we have basic laws and basic principles to live by. If we live by them, automatically good things will happen. You don’t even have to wish or hope. Good things will just automatically come along. And if you don’t live by the laws, automatically things that aren’t too palatable present themselves before you, and you get entangled in them quite automatically.

So, let’s think about the years to come. Let’s see if we are laying the foundation for our mature years to rot away, or to become beautiful and content and happy with ourselves. Look into your home right now. Look at your life. What are you doing now? What have you done? What are you going to do? Do you have a foundation for a future that is real and permanent and full and joyous and happy? Or is your life like a child’s sandbox? These are the things we have to face as we look ahead to our own advanced age.

So, don’t come to me this morning and say, “You gave a very nice upadeśa, Gurudeva. I really got so much out of it.” Rather, come back in ten years and let me see by your radiant face how much you got out of it. That will make me happy. Let me see by your tomorrows and how you meet challenges—when various things come up that you should do and you are given advice on what to do—how you face them, how polite you are, how kindly you are, how understanding you are. That will show your sincerity, your reality, your character as individuals. 