Lesson 272 From Living with Siva

The Evolution Of Humanness

Ahiṁsā, nonhurtfulness, is the essence of dharma, and the mūlādhāra chakra sets the pattern of dharma. The mūlādhāra chakra is a very interesting chakra, because it is the base center of energy and consciousness, and consciousness is energy, ever creating, preserving and absorbing. Karma is the self-perpetuating principle of cause and effect, shaping our experiences as a result of how we use our energies, mentally, verbally or physically. So, once we narrow down the individual awareness from freedom without responsibility, which is the lower nature, into the consciousness of freedom with responsibility, which is the higher nature, the individual awareness, or consciousness, must pass through the portals of the mūlādhāra chakra and rest comfortably within the energies of its four petals. Four petals, of course, form a square. Three dimensionally, two squares put together with a space between can well be defined as a box. This box is defined as dharma.

Briefly, at this point on the path to enlightenment we put our cumulative karmas into a box called dharma. Once encased within dharma, the various karmas may fight each other. As the individual progresses on the path, the box lightens and rises. The box of dharma is the base from which the aspirant must live at this point. Strictly contained, he may rise through the hole in the top of the box in consciousness, or open a hole in the bottom of the box and seek freedom without responsibility in the world of darkness. To seek freedom in the chakras above is the San Mārga. To seal off the hole at the bottom of the box is his sādhana, penitent tapas, japa, bhakti and Sivathondu, all of which is eloquently explained in Merging with Śiva.

Who holds the lid on the box? Community, community pressures, both religious and secular. There are certain things you can do and certain things you can’t do. The stronger ahiṁsā becomes at the family level, the more subtle it gets, and the violence gets more subtle, too. A careless word can cut the heart of someone you love, but someone not loved may not be wounded by anything less sharp than a knife.

Someone asks, “I am trying to seal off the chakras below the mūlādhāra, but whenever a trying situation comes up, the feelings of resentment and retaliation are paramount. What can I do?” When the feelings that come up amplify resentment, squelch reason and paralyze memory, we must assume that the box of dharma is empty and does not contain the cumulative sukarmas and kukarmas of this and past lives (the kriyamāna and prārabdha karmas), and that he is not bound by dharma at all, or that it has no influence in guiding his future karmas. There are no excuses on this path. This means that the person has really not yet come to Lord Gaṇeśa’s feet. Therefore, vrata—he must take a vow and live up to it.

Ahiṁsā is a vrata. Rishi Patanjali called it the mahāvrata, or great oath. When it is not lived up to, there are consequences. Remorse must be felt, apologies made, penance endured and reconciliation accomplished. The ego experiences embarrassment. All this and more occurs, depending on the individual’s sincerity, steadfastness and resolve never to reenter the lower nature of hiṁsā, hurtfulness, again.

Those who have found it necessary to take the mahāvrata of ahiṁsā and are prepared to make amends if they do not live up to it are well on their way to entering the mūlādhāra and svādhishṭhāna consciousness. Being penitent is rising to reason and remembering the dharma. Being belligerent is lowering to selfishness and, through confusion and anger, attaining his wants. To proceed further, he has to listen to the wise, listen to the swāmīs, read scripture, perform bhakti and do Sivathondu, selfless service. Those who remain prone to anger should not do rāja yoga or any form of intensive mantra, japa, or prāṇāyāma amplification of the energies into higher chakras—lest that collective energy plummet into the corresponding lower chakras and be vented through fear, anger and jealousy.

The fourteen chakras have been described as a pole one must climb. The pole is heavily greased with ghee. It’s a slippery pole. Therefore, the helping hand of our loving Gaṇeśa, who reaches down from the mūlādhāra, is needed to lift up the aspirant. It’s the helping hand of Lord Murugan that reaches down from the anāhata chakra, grabbing and lifting the devotee up. It is the helping hand of Śiva that reaches down from the ājñā chakra and lifts one up. One cannot do it alone. Total surrender to the Gods is the only way. Karma yoga, bhakti yoga, japa yoga is the way to attract their attention. The guru keeps the path in view, but he does not walk it for you.