Lesson 296 From Living with Siva

The Sādhana Of Resolution

If a disruption is not resolved before sleep, then a kukarmaphala, fruit of wrongdoing, will be created. The hurt feelings and mental arguments continue to fester until the matter is brought up and openly faced to be resolved. If not resolved within 72 hours, the problem germinates, and elders must take action under spiritual guidance to rectify the matter. The fact that all have chosen to avoid facing the difficulty shows that more serious remedies are required.

Resolution in all cases is accomplished through the hṛī prāyaśchitta: apology, the showing of remorse, talking together in small groups and giving gifts as tokens of reconciliation. Humility is the keynote. Sincere apology is offered for participating in argument or confusion, even if one was not necessarily to blame; the karma was there that attracted the situation. Harmony is reinstated by honestly accepting apologies, by forgiving and forgetting with the firm resolve to never bring up the matter again. Zero tolerance is based on the shared understanding that by working together on the firm foundation of love and trust all will progress in religious service and worship. Through these efforts, a sukarmaphala, fruit of right doing, is deliberately created. When two śishyas sit to settle a disharmony, it is sometimes helpful for an uninvolved third party to be present, even silently, to balance the energies.

Sādhana—personal transformation through self-effort—is the magic balm that soothes the nerve system, giving strength for each śishya to have forbearance with people and patience with circumstances. When sādhana is neglected, problems close in. Families find it difficult to see eye to eye. Hard feelings arise in even the simplest and well-intended encounters when the individuals have become too externalized.

There is a natural harmony within our monasteries, which families seek to emulate. Rarely is much discussion required when daily activities are being carried out, for the lines of authority based on seniority are always clear. This is the first boon for maintaining harmony among a group. Ours is a traditional hierarchical system of governance, upheld within our family and monastic communities, established when the Vedas were created. It is a system whereby the elders, in a loving manner, guide those younger than they. So, there is always an atmosphere of respect, loving harmony and meeting of minds. Never is scolding heard or feelings hurt or arguments provoked or sincere questions left unanswered. Here “love is the sum of the law,” and the heartfelt feelings going out from the elders protect and support those who will one day themselves be elders. We create a secure and loving society in which intelligence overrides controversy and the only rigid rule is wisdom. Thus the prāṇic magnetism of the family or monastery is maintained and kept ever building for sustainable success and spirituality.

Yes, I can tell you from experience that zero tolerance for inharmonious conditions is a workable law and sādhana that can and should be adopted by all spiritual groups and individuals. My satguru, Siva Yogaswami, used to say, “It takes a lot of courage to be happy all the time.” Most people, it seems, would rather be miserable. Think about it. They go through life getting their feelings hurt, resenting this or that and hurting the feelings of others in an endless cycle of unresolved emotion, asking a torrent of unanswerable rhetorical questions. Take today’s average family: it’s a composite of troubled individuals.