Lesson 300 From Living with Siva

The Many Levels of Love 

Those wondering how they could ever live with zero tolerance for all discord and disharmony need only realize that people are naturally tolerant with those they love. The good mother tolerates all the little problems her beloved infant brings into each day. The loving wife tolerates the faults and actions of her husband. A true friend tolerates another friend’s foibles and even rough words. If we learn to love, we automatically learn to have perfect tolerance for those we love. The ancient Tirukural reminds us, “When friends do things that hurt you, attribute it to unawareness or to the privileges of friendship” (805).

Love comes in many forms. There is physical love, magnetic attraction. This is dualistic love, because if the other person responds, you feel very good, and if he does not respond, you don’t like him. That is not the kind of love that is all encompassing. It is a very narrow form of love. It broadens a little bit with emotional love, which is the second kind of love. You love someone because he makes you happy, or you express love to make other people happy. But if someone doesn’t make you happy or you are trying to make someone else happy and he just won’t be happy, then you don’t like him anymore. That is also a dualistic form of love. It is not all encompassing. Physical love and emotional love are companions.

Then there is intellectual love, which comes in and breaks it all up. In the intellect, if you love somebody and he doesn’t agree with you, then you don’t like him. That interrupts the physical love and the emotional love. Arguments start, sarcasm begins to well up. These are all forms of partial love. People experience this every day.

Spiritual love is the fourth kind. Somewhat hard to come by, it is the love from the soul body. Spiritual love transcends physical love, emotional love and mental love. It transcends all kinds of feelings. It has a feeling of its own, which is called bliss—the ever-flowing energy from Śiva out through your body, the ever-flowing energy from Śiva out through your mind, the ever-flowing energy of Śiva out through your emotions. Caught up in that ever-flowing energy, you can truly say to everyone, “I love you.” And what does you mean? You means Śiva, because you are seeing Śiva in each one. What are you looking at when you say that? You are not looking at the body. You are not appreciating or depreciating the intellect. You are not even bothered about the emotions, whether you are liked or not liked, because you are seeing Śiva emanating out through the eyes, emanating out through the aura, emanating out through the skin. Śiva is there, and you are living with Śiva.

This great, Supreme God of all the Gods is limited in one respect: He cannot take Himself out of you or anyone else. So mentally say, “I love you,” then ask yourself the question, “What does you mean?” Does you mean you like the body of the person? No. Does you mean you like the emotions of the person? No. Does you mean you like the intellect of the person? No. Does you mean you like somebody as long as they are always pleasing to you, always agreeing with you, never upsetting you, never pulling away from you? No. It means that you love their soul. It means that you love Śiva inside of them. The light within their eyes is Śiva’s light. The light that lights up their thoughts is Śiva’s light, and that is what you love. That love is all encompassing. That love is not partial love, half love or just a little bit of love given when it pleases you. It’s not magnetic love; it’s not intellectual love. You are not putting any demands on the other person at all. You are not expecting anything back. It is love for the sake of love.

There should be a unique English word for spiritual love, but there is not. In Sanskrit we do have a word for divine love: prema. Therefore, we have to adjust our thinking when we say, “I love you,” to this all-encompassing, beautiful love that radiates throughout the universe—the perfect universe where everything is in harmony and order. And even if it is seemingly out of harmony, you know it actually is in harmony because you are in the state of consciousness where harmony is, where peace is, where bliss is. Therefore, your Śaiva Siddhānta religion can work in your daily life. 