Lesson 322 From Living with Siva

Guidelines For Prayers

We are reminded not to ask for services that the devas would normally provide, such as “Please help me,” or “Please bless me, devas.” These services are automatically performed by the guardian devas of each devout individual without asking. When not responding to requests, the devonic saṅgams send their prāṇas, with thoughts of help and healing, through the guardian devas of the devotee. They literally flood the guardian devas with prāṇas to be used by them to glorify the home and protect their wards in daily life in the physical world. This is a service given without asking. It refers to the flow of prāṇic energy to the devotee, as opposed to getting permission. To receive such blessings for yourself and to receive blessings to start a project are two different things.

Devonic helpers often do know what a devotee needs, but they are admonished by the dharmic law that requires that they must be asked before steps toward fulfillment can be taken. They are controlled by the worthy law of noninterference in the lives of those who do not pray. Prayer simply means politely asking. This ancient law is: “The devotee must first take one step toward the guru. Then the guru will take nine steps toward the devotee.” Many guardian devas connected to the saṅgam groups of devas are inner-plane gurus of karma, and when asked they will fulfill their nine steps quite willingly and abundantly.

Clarity is essential for the devas to fulfill the petitions to the lasting satisfaction of each devotee. For complex issues, the explanations may need to be lengthy. Names and addresses of the various parties involved should be included. Along with your prayers, you can send typed documents, copies of contracts, etc., to clarify the subject. In this way you can make sure that the Gods and their devas are aware of the details of your prayer and understand your need fully.

Mail or fax your prayers to a temple that knows how to handle prayers through its sacred fire. At our temples we regularly receive and accept prayers for the sacred fire from members of the Hindu religion, for they have Hindu guardian devas who are prepared to help with their needs. Non-Hindus have guardian devas of other traditions and are not encouraged to write prayers to the Hindu devas. Prayers for the sacred fire can be sent to Kadavul Hindu Temple, 107 Kaholalele Road, Kapaa, Hawaii, 96746-9304 USA. Write “prayer” on the outside of the envelope. All prayers are confidential, never read by the priests. It is traditional to give a gift of gratitude if a prayer is answered to your satisfaction, but not before. If you feel inclined to send a love offering with your prayers, for previous prayers answered, be sure to keep it outside the sealed envelope containing your prayers, as that will be placed into the sacred fire unopened. Kadavul Hindu Temple has its own rules for accepting prayers to be burned in the sacred fire. Please email for more information if you wish to send a prayer.

One word of caution: it would be weakening to depend entirely on the inner-world devas to do everything for you. There are many, many things that you can do yourself to overcome difficulties and carve a positive future. They say, “When the will rises and commands, even the Gods are willing to obey.” You have to use your willpower first, and try your very best to do the very best that you can. Then you get all the devonic help available. Don’t just send in prayers and say, “Live my life for me, inner-world beings. I am not going to do anything. I will just sit back, put my feet up and let you do everything for me.” It does not work that way.

   