Lesson 336 From Living with Siva

Song of the Sannyāsin

Wake up the note! the song that had its birth Far off, where worldly taint could never reach, In mountain caves and glades of forest deep, Whose calm no sigh for lust or wealth or fame Could ever dare to break; where rolled the stream Of knowledge, truth and bliss that follows both. Sing high that note, sannyāsin bold! Say “Om Tat Sat, Om!”

Strike off thy fetters! bonds that bind thee down, Of shining gold, or darker, baser ore— Love, hate; good, bad; and all the dual throng. Know slave is slave, caressed or whipped, not free; For fetters, though of gold, are not less strong to bind. Then off with them, sannyāsin bold! Say “Om Tat Sat, Om!”

Let darkness go; the will-o’-the-wisp that leads With blinking light to pile more gloom on gloom. This thirst for life forever quench; it drags From birth to death, and death to birth, the soul. He conquers all who conquers self. Know this and never yield, sannyāsin bold! Say “Om Tat Sat, Om!”

“Who sows must reap,” they say, “and cause must bring The sure effect: good, good; bad, bad; and none Escapes the law. But whoso wears a form Must wear the chain.” Too true; but far beyond Both name and form is ātman, ever free. Know thou art That, sannyāsin bold! Say “Om Tat Sat, Om!”

They know not truth who dream such vacant dreams As father, mother, children, wife and friend. The sexless Self—whose father He? whose child? Whose friend, whose foe, is He who is but One? The Self is all in all—none else exists; And thou art That, sannyāsin bold! Say “Om Tat Sat, Om!”

There is but One: the Free, the Knower, Self, Without a name, without a form or stain. In Him is māyā, dreaming all this dream. The Witness, He appears as nature, soul. Know thou art That, sannyāsin bold! Say “Om Tat Sat, Om!”

Where seekest thou? That freedom, friend, this world Nor that can give. In books and temples, vain Thy search. Thine only is the hand that holds The rope that drags thee on. Then cease lament. Let go thy hold, sannyāsin bold! Say “Om Tat Sat, Om!”

Say, “Peace to all. From me no danger be To aught that lives. In those that dwell on high, In those that lowly creep—I am the Self in all! All life, both here and there, do I renounce, All heavens and earths and hells, all hopes and fears.” Thus cut thy bonds, sannyāsin bold! Say “Om Tat Sat, Om!”

Heed then no more how body lives or goes. Its task is done: let karma float it down. Let one put garlands on, another kick This frame: say naught. No praise or blame can be Where praiser, praised, and blamer, blamed, are one. Thus be thou calm, sannyāsin bold! Say “Om Tat Sat, Om!”

Truth never comes where lust and fame and greed Of gain reside. No man who thinks of woman As his wife can ever perfect be; Nor he who owns the least of things, nor he Whom anger Chains, can ever pass through māyā’s gates. So, give these up, sannyāsin bold! Say “Om Tat Sat, Om!”

Have thou no home. What home can hold thee, friend? The sky thy roof, the grass thy bed, and food What chance may bring—well cooked or ill, judge not. No food or drink can taint that noble Self Which knows Itself. Like rolling river free Thou ever be, sannyāsin bold! Say “Om Tat Sat, Om!”

Few only know the truth. The rest will hate And laugh at thee, great one; but pay no heed. Go thou, the free, from place to place, and help Them out of darkness, māyā’s veil. Without The fear of pain or search for pleasure, go Beyond them both, sannyāsin bold! Say “Om Tat Sat, Om!”

Thus day by day, till karma’s power’s spent, Release the soul forever. No more is birth, Nor I, nor thou, nor God, nor man. The “I” Has All become, the All is “I” and Bliss. Know thou art That, sannyāsin bold! Say “Om Tat Sat, Om!”

“Song of the Sannyāsin” by Swami Vivekananda is quoted, with written permission, from Inspired Talks, My Master and Other Writings; copyright 1958 by Swami Nikhilananda, trustee of the estate of Swami Vivekananda; published by the Ramakrishna-Vivekananda Center of New York. 

   