Lesson 244 From Merging with Siva

The Continuity Of Consciousness

In India there is the concept that dreams affect not only the dreamer himself but those around him as well. Partially this is because the concept of self is intertwined with everything else: family, community, village, cosmos. Thus, a dream by the guru would affect all of his monks. The dreams that a guru would dream would become the teachings of the guru to all śishyas. But because the śishyas were in tune with his inner mind, the knowledge would be imparted to them at the same time that the dreams were occurring. Therefore, they would very rapidly pick up on the teachings that developed out of the dreams.

Similarly, families, friends, loved ones and relations are all connected. To be connected to a guru would not disconnect you from your family, but only from the members of the family that were not connected to the same guru. They would, all of a sudden, be on the outside of the family looking in, because they would not be in the inner, dream, astral, inner-plane-school phenomenon that being connected to a guru provides. When entire families are of the same sampradāya and hold allegiance to the same paramparā, all goes well in the continuity of consciousness through the entire life cycle.

There is no reason to think that dreams are individually secret in the vibrations they create and that they do not affect the inner minds of those the person is connected to. But then again, this applies to people who are doing regular spiritual disciplines and are tapping inner resources and through these inner resources are tapping the higher dimensions of the mind and striving for higher consciousness.

The first thing a guru would do, or which you can do, if somebody tells about a dream, is to discern if he is an undisciplined person. If so, the dream obviously reflects his undisciplined nature. If he has been disciplined in the past and is now resting on his accomplishments and has let down on his disciplines, or if he is currently doing yoga at a certain time each day, this knowledge itself will show in the dream’s quality.

In India, dreams are also understood to be good and bad omens. The Atharva Veda’s appendix sixty-eight is all about the symbolism of dreams. Traditional good omens are dreaming that you have been killed, that your house has burned down. Indian dream analyzers actually interpret those dreams as positive. Dreaming that your teeth are falling out is bad. Being covered with oil is bad. Dreaming of a woman in a green or red sārī is bad, though dreaming of a woman in general is considered auspicious. If you dream that someone gave you an umbrella or that you are riding on a camel, that is good. It is only ignorance—which is the ability to ignore—to pass over an entire subject area of knowledge with a superficial reason or comment. These age-old traditions which have stood the test of time are obviously a systematic investigation by many learned people of what tens of thousands of men and women have experienced after having had dreams of these kinds and thus formulated these postulations. The Western rationalist would write them off simply as superstition.

The word superstition comes from the Latin superstitio, originally meaning “a standing still over.” Webster’s Dictionary defines superstition as “any belief or attitude based on fear or ignorance that is inconsistent with the known laws of science or with what is generally considered in the particular society as true and rational, especially such a belief in charms, omens, the supernatural, etc.” These simple words are very important because they have the power to block out from human consciousness vast amounts of mystical knowledge. The Hindu looks at time not in a twenty-four-hour day, but a cycle of lifetimes, of many lives, and from creation of the soul to its eventual fulfillment of merger in Śiva. The Westerner looks at time as a straight line. It has a beginning; it has an end. The line begins at birth and ends at death. Therefore, such a short line of consciousness cannot waste time in superstition, imagination. Whereas the Hindu believes that the knowledge acquired in one life should be carried over to the next life, the next and the next. It is an ever-building, ever-growing maturation of not only the soul but the many bodies it inhabits.

The theme that we are working with is the continuity of consciousness from birth to death—but even more, from the creation of the soul to its final merger into its creator, having fully matured into the image and likeness of the creator—and the experiential consciousness, twenty-four hours a day, as creating karmas. 