Lesson 265 From Merging with Siva

Kuṇḍalinī, the Spiritual Force

Haṭha yoga (ha-piṅgalā and ṭha-iḍā) balances the two forces, the iḍā and the piṅgalā. The straight, erect spine releases the actinodic flow of the sushumṇā current. The mind centered in the contemplative atmosphere, cognizing timelessness, causelessness, spacelessness while sitting in the lotus position, awakens the pineal and pituitary centers, and the door of Brahman at the top of the head.

The force of the actinodic causal body, the sheath of cognition, vijñānamaya kośa, a pure actinic force running through the sushumṇā current, is called the kuṇḍalinī. As this kuṇḍalinī force becomes activated, the sushumṇā power begins to grow, or the actinodic causal body begins to grow, and the higher chakras of cognition and universal love begin to spin faster. Once kuṇḍalinī power has been activated, its force expands or contracts consciousness. As man’s consciousness expands into actinic spheres, more kuṇḍalinī power is used. This power is lessened as his consciousness emerges into the limited fields of the odic world.

Often known as the serpent power, the kuṇḍalinī is coiled at the base of the spine in the instinctive man who resides mostly in the force fields of memory and fear. When this power becomes uncoiled, the serpent, or kuṇḍalinī, luminously raises its head, and finally, after nirvikalpa samādhi, it lifts its power to the top of the head.

When nirvikalpa samādhi has been practiced daily for many, many years—according to the classical yoga teachings, for twelve years—and the golden body has been built, the kuṇḍalinī force coils itself in the sahasrāra chakra of the yogī, at the top of the head. This is known as the manas chakra, located about where the hairline begins at the forehead. This chakra eventually becomes the mūlādhāra chakra, or the memory-pattern chakra, of the golden body. The manas chakra is fully activated when the golden body is fully unfolded. This is known in Hindu and Egyptian mystic schools as the golden body of light, for it registers in the minds of those who look upon it, to their soul body, as a golden ball of light or a golden body.

When the kuṇḍalinī rises into the realms of pure actinicity, the pineal gland and pituitary center are activated. When these two centers are activated simultaneously, the forces of both of them merge, bringing man into nirvikalpa samādhi. Therefore, the aggressive odic force merges with the passive odic force, in perfect balance, and the actinodic power of the sushumṇā current comes into perfect balance, poised with the kuṇḍalinī force. The yoga adept finds himself on the brink of the Absolute, cognizing That which he cannot explain, knowing there is something beyond which the mind does not know, conceiving That which cannot be conceived, because form, which is mind, cannot conceive formlessness. Then the yogī touches into the Self and becomes a knower of the Self, merges with Śiva.

When the iḍā, piṅgalā and sushumṇā forces merge and reside in perfect balance, the third eye awakens. When the pituitary, pineal glands and the sushumṇā source are in perfect balance, man is able to perceive consciously into other worlds of the mind. The golden body, as it begins to grow after the renunciate, or sannyāsin, attains nirvikalpa samādhi, is built by man’s service to his fellow man.