Lesson 266 From Merging with Siva

The Way after Realization

When a yoga guru brings others from darkness into light and from light into Self Realization, he is also strengthening his own golden body. When a satguru makes it easy for his sannyāsins to remain in the practice of Self Realization, encouraging them and demanding of them the practice of nirvikalpa samādhi, he helps them hold their forces in check through the power of his golden body.

After nirvikalpa samādhi, the sannyāsin has a choice to serve mankind or to wait for mankind to unfold into the consciousness that he has attained. This is called being a bodhisattva or upadeśī, one who serves, or an arahat or nirvāṇī, one who waits. The golden body begins to grow through service and by bringing others into enlightenment as a bodhisattva, or through the constant practice of nirvikalpa samādhi while living a strictly secluded life as an arahat, only mixing with those of his own level of realization.

The sahasrāra chakra at the top of the head and the ājñā chakra at the brow, or the third eye, are the two controlling force centers of the soul body. These force centers become the two lowest chakras of the yoga master’s new golden body, svarṇaśarīra, as this body begins to build after his first nirvikalpa samādhi.

The usual experience before nirvikalpa samādhi is for the aspirant to become a knower of the Self. This could occur at any time during his training. In order to attain this experience of “touching into the Self,” he must have a complete balance of all odic and actinic forces within him. A noted change in his life pattern often occurs after he becomes a knower of the Self, for the soul body has become released into orbit, and he has then a subsuperconscious control of this body. In other words, the odic-force tie has been released. This body has quickly matured. Then, if practicing contemplation as prescribed by his satguru and finally working out the various karmic binds or holds in the lower odic force field with the help of the guru, he attains complete Self Realization, or nirvikalpa samādhi. Then the golden body, svarṇaśarīra, is born through the merging of the forces of the pituitary and the pineal gland, setting the sahasrāra into a constant spinning motion. This constant spinning motion generates the force which propels the yoga adept back into nirvikalpa samādhi. Each time he goes into nirvikalpa samādhi he intensifies a little the spinning movement of this chakra, unfolding it a little more, and as this occurs, the golden body begins to build.

When the yoga adept touches into the Self and becomes a knower of the Self, attains nirvikalpa samādhi, becomes Self Realized, yoga powers come to him. These yoga powers are often renounced, depending upon the rule of the order to which he belongs, whether it be a teaching order or an order of hermits. According to the need, a power is developed. The powers that a yogī can use are as many as the petals within the sahasrāra chakra. They are 1,008. These powers are conceived through the nāḍīs—small, elastic-like psychic nerve currents extending out into and through the aura of the body. The nāḍīs work in conjunction with the chakras, and with the major currents of the body, iḍā, piṅgalā and sushumṇā.

Realizing Paraśiva gives you great power, but to use that power very sparingly or not at all is the greater thing to do, because the power itself works of its own accord. If you have powers, siddhis that are unfolded, it is best not to consciously use them. You can demonstrate to yourself to be sure you have them, but these siddhis are all connected with devonic forces that will work totally for righteousness without your demonstrating them. That is why no one wants to come up against a ṛishi. Similarly, a good king does not use his power. He makes everything flourish without appearing to be powerful. His greater power happens in unseen ways.

Remember, when the kuṇḍalinī force becomes strong within you during a meditation, just sit and be aware that you are aware—a blissful state called kaīf in Shūm, the language of meditation. You will feel very positive and experience yourself as a great big ball of energy. When the energy begins to wane, try to absorb it into every cell of your external body, then continue your meditation exactly where you left off. In this way you will build a strong, disciplined nerve system and subconscious mind. This will lead you naturally onto the next inner plateau, then to the next and the next.

Never allow yourself to be complacent in your spiritual attainments. Always continue to strive. Even ṛishis, swāmīs and yogīs who have totally realized Paraśiva continue to work on themselves from within themselves. They don’t let down, because if they did it would be many years before they had the next experience of the timelessness, formlessness, spacelessness of the unspeakable Paraśiva experience. The message, therefore, is, at the beginning of meditation and at the end, keep striving. Don’t turn back, but proceed with confidence.

   